Bereishit Rabbah
בראשית רבה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Bereishit Rabbah



Chapter 1

The great Rabbi Hoshaya opened [with the verse (Mishlei 8:30),] "I [the Torah] was an amon to Him and I was a plaything to Him every day." Amon means "pedagogue" (i.e. nanny). Amon means "covered." Amon means "hidden." And there is one who says amon means "great." Amon means "nanny," as in (Bamidbar 11:12) “As a nanny (omein) carries the suckling child."  Amon means "covered," as in (Eichah 4:5) "Those who were covered (emunim) in scarlet have embraced refuse heaps." Amon means "hidden," as in (Esther 2:7) "He hid away (omein) Hadassah." Amon means "great," as in (Nahum 3:8) "Are you better than No-amon [which dwells in the rivers]?" which the Targum renders as, "Are you better than Alexandria the Great (amon), which dwells between the rivers?" Alternatively, amon means "artisan." The Torah is saying, "I was the artisan's tool of Hashem." In the way of the world, a king of flesh and blood who builds a castle does not do so from his own knowledge, but rather from the knowledge of an architect, and the architect does not build it from his own knowledge, but rather he has scrolls and books in order to know how to make rooms and doorways. So too Hashem gazed into the Torah and created the world. Similarly the Torah says, "Through the reishis Hashem created [the heavens and the earth]," and reishis means Torah, as in "Hashem made me [the Torah] the beginning (reishis) of His way" (Mishlei 8:22).
Rabbi Yehoshua of Sichnin in the name of Rabbi Levi opened [with the verse (Tehillim 111:6),] "The power of His works he told to His people [Yisrael]." Why did Hashem reveal to Yisrael that which was created on the first day, and the second day [and so forth]? Because of the idolaters - so that they will not embitter Yisrael and say to them, "Are you not a nation of thieves?" And Yisrael would reply to them, saying, "Aren't your own lands stolen? Didn't (Devarim 2:23) 'The Caphtorim emerge from Caphtor and destroy [the Aviyim] and settle in their stead?' [Furthermore,] the entire world belongs to Hashem; thus, when it pleased Him, He gave it to you, and when it pleased Him, He took it from you and gave it to us." As it is written (Tehillim 111:6), "[In order] to give them an inheritance of the nations," He told [Yisrael] all of the generations.
"In the beginning God created..." Rabbi Tanchuma opened [with the verse (Psalms 86:10),] "For You are great, and you perform wonders...." Rabbi Tanchum said: with a pouch, if you puncture a hole in its side with a pin, all its air comes out of it.  Whereas the person is made with all kinds of hollows and holes, and his air does not leave his body.  Who could make such a thing? "....You, God, alone."[the second half of the verse] When were the angels created?  Rabbi Yochanan said: the angels were created on the second day. Just as it says (in Psalms 104:4), "He sets the rafters of the upper chambers in the water..." [creating the sky in the upper waters which God does on the second day] and then it is written, "He makes the winds his messengers (or, 'his angels')."  Rabbi Chanina said: the angels were created on the fifth day, where it is written "and let the bird fly (ye-ofef) across the earth," and (in Isaiah 6:2) it is written, "and with two [wings] he (the Seraphic angel) would fly (ye-ofef)."  Rabbi Luliana bar Tavrin said in the name of Rabbi Yitzchak: whether according to the opinion of Rabbi Chanina, or whether according to the opinion of Rabbi Yochanan, all agree that they were not created on the first day - so that they could not say that the angl Michael stretched out the south end of the sky and Gabriel the north end, and the Holy One, Blessed be He, measured out the middle.  Rather, (as it says in Isaiah 44:24), "I am God who makes all, and who alone stretches out the heavens...with only Myself (me-iti)"  'Mi iti' (who, with me) is written, meaning, "WHO partnered WITH ME in the creation of the world?!?"  Another interpretation: "For You are great and You do wonders..." It is the way of the world that a king of flesh and blood is praised in the land, and the great men of the land are praised with him, for they carry his burden with him.  But the Holy One, Blessed be He, is not like this.  Rather, He alone created the world.  He alone is praised in the world. He alone is glorified in his world.  Rabbi Tanchuma said: "For you are great and You do wonders..." Why? Because, "...You, God, alone."  You, alone, created the world.
"In the beginning of God's creating..." - Six things preceded the creation of the world; some of them were created and some of them were decided to be created. The Torah and the Throne of Glory were created. How do we know the Torah was? As it says (Proverbs 8:22): "God made me at the beginning of his way." How do we know the Throne of Glory was? As it says (Psalms 93:2): "Your throne is established as of old etc." The Patriarchs, Israel, the Temple, and the name of the Messiah were decided to be created. How do we know the Patriarchs were? As it says (Hosea 9:10): "Like grapes in the wilderness etc." How do we know Israel was? As it says (Psalms 74:2): "Remember your congregation, whom you purchased from old." How do we know the Temple was? As it says (Jeremiah 17:12): "Your throne of glory, on high from the beginning etc." How do we know the name of the Messiah was? As it says (Psalms 72:17): "May his name exist forever etc. [his name shall be Yinnon as long as the sun]." Rabbi Ahavah said in the name of Rabbi Ze'ira: Even repentance was, as it says (Psalms 90:2): "Before the mountains were birthed," and at the same time (Psalms 90:3), "You turned man to contrition etc." However, I do not know which was first--if the Torah preceded the Throne of Glory or the Throne of Glory preceded the Torah. Rabbi Abba Bar Cahana said: The Torah preceded the Throne of Glory, as it says (Proverbs 8:22): "God made me at the beginning of his way, the first of his works of old." This is before that of which it is written (Psalms 93:2): "Your throne is established as of old." Rabbi Hunna and Rabbi Yirmiyah in the name of Rabbi Shmuel the son of Rabbi Yitzchak said: The thought of Israel was before everything. This is like a king who was married to a woman and did not have a son. One time the king was in the market and said: "Take this ink and pen for my son." They said: "He does not have a son." He replied: "Take them; the king must expect a son, because otherwise he would not command that the ink and pen be taken." Similarly, if there was no expectation of Israel receiving it after 26 generations, God would not have written in the Torah: "Command the children of Israel" or "Speak to the children of Israel." Rabbi Bannai said: The world and its contents were only created in the merit of the Torah, as it says (Proverbs 3:19): "God founded the world with wisdom etc." Rabbi Berachiyah said: In the merit of Moses, as it says (Deuteronomy 33:21): "He saw a first part for himself." Rabbi Hunna said in the name of Rabbi Matanah: The world was created in the merit of three things--challah, tithes, and first fruits. The verse "In the beginning God created" refers to challah, as it says (Numbers 15:20): "The beginning of your doughs." It also refers to tithes, as it says (Deuteronomy 18:4): "The beginning of your grains." It also refers to first fruits, as it says (Exodus 23:19): "The beginning of the fruits of the land."
Rabbi Hunna in the name of Bar Kafra opened with (Psalms 31:19): "Let the lying lips be dumb, that speak against the righteous arrogantly with pride and contepmpt." Let them be bound, made dumb, and silenced. "Let them be bound and made dumb"--as it says (Exodus 4:11): "Or who made one mute, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? Was it not I, God?" and it says (Genesis 37:7): "We were binding sheaves in the field, and my sheaf rose." (The word for 'sheaf' is similar to 'mute'.) "Let them be silenced"--as it sounds. "Which speak against the righteous"--the life of all worlds (God). "Arrogantly"--[on matters] he has hidden from his creatures (The word for 'arrogant' is similar to 'hidden'). "In pride"--to boast and say: "I can explain creation." "And contempt"--to hold My glory in contempt. As Rabbi Yossi Bar Chanina said: One who honor's oneself at the expense of one's friend has no share in the World to Come. How much more so with the honor of God! And it says afterward (Psalms 31:20): "How abundant is Your goodness that you have laid up for those who fear You." Those who fear You and not for those who hold Your awe in contempt. When a king builds a palace in a place of sewers, dunghills, and garbage, everyone who says: "This palace is built on sewers, dunghills, and garbage" discredits it. So too, everyone who says the universe was created from nothingness discredits it. Rabbi Hunna in the name of Bar Kafra said: If it were not written, it would be impossible to say it. "In the beginning God created" from what? "And the earth was empty."
Rabbi Yehudah Bar Simon opened with (Daniel 2:22): "He reveals the deep and secret. He knows what is in the darkness, and the light dwells with Him." "He reveals the deep"--this is Hell, as it says (Proverbs 9:18): "He does not know there are spirits there," and it says (Isaiah 30:33): "deep and large". "And secret"--this is Paradise, as it says (Isaiah 4:6): "for a cover and refuge from storm and rain," and it says (Psalms 31:21): "You hide them in the cover of Your presence." Alternatively, "he reveals the deep and secret"--these are the acts of the wicked, as it says (Isaiah 29:15): "Woe to the ones who seek deep from God to make their counsel secret." "And secret"--these are the acts of the wicked, as the verse states. "He knows what is in the dark"--these are the acts of the wicked, as it says in Isaiah: "Their acts are in the dark." "The light dwells with Him"--these are the acts of the righteous, as it is written (Proverbs 4:18): "The path of the righteous is like the light at dawn," and it says (Psalms 97:11): "Light is sown for the righteous." Rabbi Abba Srungia said: "The light dwells with Him"--this is the Messiah, as it says (Isaiah 60:1): "Arise, shine, for your light has come." Rabbi Yehudah Bar Simon said: From the beginning of the creation of the world, "he revealed the dark and secret". "In the beginning God created the heavens," but it is not explained. Where is it explained? Here (Isaiah 40:22): "He stretches out the heavens like a curtain." "And the land," but it is not explained. Where is it explained? Here (Job 37:6): "For He says to the snow: 'Fall on the earth.'" and (Job 38:38) "When the dust runs into a mass, and the clods cleave together." "And God said: 'Let there be light,'" and it is not explained. Where is it explained? (Psalms 104:2) "You cover Yourself with light like a garment."
Rabbi Yitzchak opened with (Psalms 119:160): "The beginning of Your word is truth, and Your righteous law is forever." Rabbi Yitzchak said: From the beginning of the creation of the world "the beginning of Your word is truth." "In the beginning God created"--(Jeremiah 10:10) "Your God is true." "And Your righteous law is forever"--that for every restriction that you place on your creations, they affirm the righteousness of your judgement and accept it with faith. No creation can say that two powers created the world. It is not written: "the gods spoke", but rather: "God spoke". It is not written: "the gods said", but rather: "God said". It is not written: "in the beginning the gods created", but rather: "God created".
Rabbi Yehoshua Ben Levi said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Six things are required for building--water, dirt, wood, stone, rods, and iron. If you say he is rich, and does not need rods, he still needs measuring rods, as it says (Ezekiel 40:3): "with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring rod". The Torah preceded these with six--"the first", "of old", "forever", "from the start", and "from the first" which is two, in the portion (Proverbs 8:22-23): "God made me as the beginning of His way, the first of His works of old. I was set up forever, from the start, from the first of the Earth."
A philosopher once asked Rabbah Gamliel and said to him, ''Your God is only a great artist because he found great materials that helped him: tohu and vohu, darkness, spirit, water, and the depths." Rabbi Gamliel responded to him: "Your spirit should blow! Regarding all of them, the term 'creation' is written: tohu and vohu, as it says (Isaiah 45:7), 'He makes peace and creates evil'; darkness, 'He fashions light and creates darkness'; water (Tehillim 148:5), 'Praise the heavens and the waters' - why? - for 'He commanded and they were created'; spirit (Amos 4:13), 'For behold he fashions mountains and creates spirit'; the depths (Mishlei 8:24), 'When there were no depths, I was created.'"
Rabbi Yonah said in the name of Rabbi Levi: Why was the world created with a "bet"? Just as a bet is closed on all sides and open in the front, so you are not permitted to say, "What is beneath? What is above? What came before? What will come after?" Rather from the day the world was created and after. Bar Kappara said: "You have but to inquire about bygone ages that came before you [ever since G-d created humanity on earth]" (Deuteronomy 4:32). "Ever since G-d created them" you may speculate, however you may not speculate on what was before that. ["From one end of Heaven to the other"] on this you may speculate and investigate, but you may not speculate and investigate  0n what was before. Rabbi Yehudah ben Pazzi explained the Creation story according to Bar Kappara. Why was the world created with a "bet"? To teach you there are two worlds: this world and the world-to-come. D'var Acher: Why with a "bet"? Because it is the language of "blessing." And why not with an "aleph"? Because it is the language of "cursing."
R. Simon said in the name of R. Joshua b. Levi: Manzapak [מנצפ"ך] is a Mosaic halahhah from Sinai. R, Jeremiah said in the name of R. Hiyya b. Abba: They are what the zofim [i.e. prophets] instituted.  It once happened on a stormy day that the Sages did not attend the House of Assembly [i.e. the Academy]. Some children were there and they said, 'Come and let us make a House of Assembly. Why are there written [two different forms when the following letters come in the middle or end of a word respectively] mem [מ] mem [ם], nun [נ] nun [ן], tzadi [צ], tzadi [ץ], pai [פ] pai [ף]? It teaches [that the Torah was transmitted] from utterance [מאמר] to utterance, from Faithful [נאמן] to faithful, from Righteous [צדיק] to righteous, from mouth [פה] to mouth, and from hand [כף] to hand. From utterance to utterance — from the utterance of the Holy One, blessed be He, to the utterance of Moses. From Faithful to faithful— from theAlmighty, who is designated, "God, faithful King," to Moses, who is designated faithful, as it is written, "He [Moses] is faithful in all My house" (Numbers 12:7). From Righteous to righteous— from God, who is designated righteous, as it is written, "The Lord is righteous in all His ways" (Psalms 145:17), to Moses who is designated righteous, as it is written, "He executed the righteousness of the Lord" (Deuteronomy 33:21). From mouth to mouth — from the mouth of the Holy One, blessed be He, to the mouth of Moses. From hand to hand: from the hand of the Holy One, blessed be He, to the hand of Moses. They completed them and they grew to be great sages in Israel; some say that they were R. Eliezer, R. Joshua and R. Akiba. They applied to them the verse, "Even a child is known by his doings, etc." (Proverbs 20:11).

Chapter 2



Chapter 3

AND GOD SAID: LET THERE BE LIGHT. Rabbi Isaac opened with: The opening of Thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto the simple. Rabbi Judah and R Nabbiehemiah disagree. Rabbi Judah maintains: The light was created first, this being comparable to a king who wished to build a palace, but the site was a dark one. What did he do? He lit lamps and lanterns, to know where to lay the foundations ; in like manner was the light created first. Rabbi Nehemiah said: The world was created first, this being similar to the king who built a palace and then adorned it with lights. Thus far did Rabbi Judan interpret. But Rabbi Phinehas and Rabbi Judah ben Rabbi Simon came, and Rabbi IJanin in the name of Rabbi Samuel ben Rabbi Isaac,and preached :' The opening of Thy words giveth light The opening of Thy mouth was light to us : A N D GOD SAID: LET THERE BE LIGHT.
Berchia said in the name of Rabbi Yehuda bar Simon. "The Heavens were made at the word of the Lord..." (Psalm 33:6), means G-d didn't work hard, but only spoke. "And G-d said and there was light".






Said Rabbi Shmuel bar Ami - from the beginning of Creation the Holy One of Blessing desired to have partnership with the beings in the lower realm. How can you say this? If it was just a question of the accounting [of days] it only needed to say "one, two, three" OR "first, second, third" - this is indeed surprising, since [the account of creation beginning with] one and then  second and third. When did the Holy One of Blessing solve this? In the setting up of the Mishkan, as it says: "And the gifter, on the first day, his offering" - this is the first of the creation of the world. Said the Holy One of Blessing: it is as if on that day I created My world. It is taught: twelve tiaras [measures of beauty] that day received - it  was first for the creation of the world, first for kings, first for princes, first for the kohanim, first for the Shechinah, as it says (Ex. 25:8) 'And they shall make Me a sanctuary", first for blessing, first for worship, first for forbidden animals, first for laws of slaughtering on the north, first for lowering of fire, as it is said (Lev. 9:24): 'And a fire came forth from God etc'

Chapter 4

And God said, "Let there be a firmament" - It is written (Psalms 104:3), "Who layest the beams of Thine upper chambers in the waters." It is the custom of the world that a king of flesh and blood constructs a palace and makes a roof for it out of stones and wood and dirt. But the Holy One Blessed Be He made a roof for his world out of water, as it says "Who layest the beams of Thine upper chambers in the waters."

Chapter 5





R' Yochanan says: God stipulated with the sea that it should split before Israel; thus it is written (Shemos 14:27), "And the sea returned... to its strength (l'eisano)" - to the stipulation (l'tano) that [God] made with it. R' Yirmiyah ben Elazar says: not only with the sea did God stipulate, but with all that He created during the six days of Creation; thus it is written, "From my hand I [God] have stretched the heavens, and all their legions I have commanded" - I commanded the sea to split before Israel; I commanded the heavens and the earth to be silent before Moshe, as it is stated, "Give ear, O heavens etc."; I commanded the sun and the moon to stand still before Yehoshua, as it is stated, "Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon"; I commanded the ravens to sustain Eliyahu, as it is stated, "And the ravens were bringing him etc."; I commanded the fire not to harm Chanania, Mishael, and Azarya; I commanded the lions not to harm Daniel; I commanded the heavens to open to the voice of Yechezkel, as it is stated, "The heavens opened etc."; [and] I commanded the fish to spit out Yonah, as it is states, "Hashem spoke to the fish and it spat out Yonah."
R' Eliezer says, from the beginning of the world's creation, Hashem decreed and said, 'Let the waters be gathered" (Genesis 1:8). Why [does Scripture state] 'That calleth for the waters of the sea' 'That calleth for the waters of the sea' two times? Once for the generation of the deluge, and once for the generation of Enosh, so that 'The Lord does and they shall fear before him' (Kohelet 3). This is comparable to a country that rebels against its king; the king sends a fierce legion and surrounds it so that the countrymen should see him and fear before him. Similarly, why does 'He gathereth the waters of the sea together as a heap?' (Tehilim 33:7). So that 'All the earth fear the Lord' (ibid v. 8)
......

"And God said: let the earth put forth grass"(Gen. 1:11). It was taught in the name of Rabbi Natan: three entered for judgment, and four emerged guilty, and these are they: Adam and Eve and the serpent entered for judgment, and the Earth was cursed with them, as it says: "The earth will be cursed because of you" (Gen. 3:17),[which means] it will bring up cursed things for you, like flies and mosquitos and fleas. Rabbi Yitzchak from Gedela'ah said: Even they are the source of some benefit. Why was the Earth cursed? Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Shimon [Shalom] and Rabbi Pinchas [disagreed], Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Shimon [Shalom] said: because the Earth transgressed a commandment; The Holy Blessed One said to her [Earth] "let the earth put forth grass etc." just as the fruit is eaten, so too the tree is eaten and she did not do so, but rather "the earth put forth grass" - the fruit was edible, but the tree was not edible. Rabbi Pinchas said: she added to the commandment - she strengthened the will of her Creator "a fruit-bearing tree" - even barren trees produced fruit. According to the opinion of Rabbi Yehuda bar Rabbi Shimon [Shalom] it makes sense, but according to the opinion of Rabbi Pinchas why was the Earth cursed? Rather, it's like a person who says: 'they were cursed due to their disgraceful nursemaid.'

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8











Male and female (nekebah) created He them (1, 27). This is one of the things which they altered for King Ptolemy: 'Male with his apertures (nekubaw) created He them.' R. Joshua b. R. Nehemiah said in the name of R. Hanina b. R. Isaac, and the Rabbis in the name of R. Leazar said: He created him with four attributes of the higher beings [i.e. angels] and four attributes of the lower beings [i.e. beasts]. [The four attributes of] the higher beings are: he stands upright, like the ministering angels; he speaks, like the ministering angels; he understands, like the ministering angels ; and he sees, like the ministering angels. Yet does not a dumb animal see ! But this one [man] can see from the side. He has four attributes of the lower beings: he eats and drinks, like an animal; procreates, like an animal; excretes, like an animal; and dies, like an animal. R. Tifdai said in R. Aha's name: The celestial beings were created in the image and likeness [of God] and do not procreate, while the terrestial creatures [dumb animals] procreate but were not created in [His] image and likeness. Said the Holy One, blessed be He: 'Behold, I will create him [man] in [My] image and likeness, [so that he will partake] of the [character of the] celestial beings, while he will procreate, [after the nature] of the terrestial beings R. Tifdai said in R, Aha's name: The Holy One, blessed be He, said: 'If I create him of the celestial elements he will live [for ever] and not die, and if I create him of the terrestial elements, he will die and not live [in a future life]. Therefore I will create him of the upper and of the lower elements: if he sins he will die; while if he does not sin, he will live.'

Chapter 9

The Rabbis said in the name of Rabbi Chanina the son of Idi and Rabbi Pinchas the son of Rabbi Chilkiya: … “And behold it was very good” – this refers to man. 





Rabbi Nachman bar Shmuel bar Nachman said in the the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachman, "Behold, it is very good," that is [referring to] the impulse to the good; and "Behold, it is very good," that is [referring to] the impulse to the bad. And it is a wonder - is the impulse to the bad very good? Rather, [it is because] without the impulse to the bad, a man would not build a house and not marry a woman, and not [engage in commerce]. And so Shlomo says [about the source of these things](Ecclesiastes 4:4), "it is men’s envy of each other."

Chapter 10









<b>[On the eve of Shabbat, we add from the mundane to the holy (to begin the Shabbat before the sunset).]</b> Rabbi (Yehudah HaNassi) asked Rabbi Yishmael Bar Yose: He said to him, “Did you hear from your father, what is [meant by], 'And God finished on the seventh day?' It is a wonder.” “Rather, it is like the one that raises his hammer over the anvil – he raises it while it is still day and lowers it when it gets dark.” Shimon ben Yochai said, “[A person of] flesh and blood that does not know his [exact] times, nor his instants, neither his hours; he adds from the mundane to the holy. But the Holy One, blessed be He, who knows his instants and his times and his hours, enters into [the Shabbat] as upon a hair's breadth.” Geniva and our rabbis [discussed this point]: Geniva said, “It is comparable to a king that made a bridal canopy and  embellished it and tiled it. And what was lacking? A bride to enter inside it. So [too], what was the world lacking? Shabbat?” Our rabbis said, “It is comparable to a king that made himself a ring. What was lacking? An imprimatur. So [too], what was the world lacking? Shabbat?” And this is one of the things that they changed for [the Greek translation demanded by] Ptolemy the King: [they changed the verse to] “And God finished on the sixth day and He rested on the seventh day.” Ptolemy the King asked the elders in Rome, “In how many days did the Holy One, blessed be He, create the world?” They said to him, “In six days.” He said [back] to them, “And from that time, <i>gehinnom</i> burns for the evildoers; woe to the world from its workings. “His work” - Did not Rabbi Berakhiah say in the name of Rabbi Simon, “The Holy One, blessed be He, did not create the world with toil or with exertion, and you say, 'from all of His work?' It is a wonder. But rather, to exact payment from the evildoers, as they are destroying the world that was all created with toil and exertion; and to give a good reward to the righteous, as they are preserving the world that was all created with toil and exertion.” And what was created once He rested? Peacefulness, rest, tranquility and quiet. Rabbi Levi [said] in the name of Rabbi Yose bar Nehorai, “The whole time that the hands of their Makers were manipulating them, they were stretching further. Once They rested Their hands from them, They gave them rest, and there was rest for His world on the seventh day.” Rabbi Abba said, “[With a leader of] flesh and blood, at the time that he provides a furlough, he does not give provisions and at the time that he gives provisions, he does not provide a furlough. But the Holy One, blessed be He, provided a furlough and gave provisions - 'and He rested... and He blessed.'”

Chapter 11


"And Elokim blessed the seventh day and sanctified it"- Rabbi Yishmael says: "He blessed it" with manna "and sanctified it" with manna, He blessed it with manna-for all the days of the week one omer [portion] fell [per person], on Friday two omer [portions] fell [per person]. He sanctified it with manna [on Shabbat] it didn't fall at all. Rabbi Nosson says: He blessed it with manna and sanctified it with blessing. Rabbi Yitzhak says: He blessed it with manna, and sanctified it with the gatherer [of sticks]. "And He blessed it" with robing. Rav Huna says:  [one] must change [one's clothes]. R' Chiyya in the name of Rav Yochanon says: [one] must mingle [a garment along with his weekday clothes  for the honor of Shabbat]. Avin son of Chasdai says [one] must [let one's cloak] hang.  Rabbi Yermiah and R' Zeirah were walking together, and R' Yermiah's cloak was tucked up and Rabbi Zeirah let it hang. This [reflects] what was said [that] one must lower [one's cloak]. R' Elazar says: "He blessed it" with a candle and this occurred to me, one time I lit a candle on the eve of Shabbat and I came and I found it [still] lit at the end of Shabbat and it wasn't diminished at all. "He blessed it" with the light of the face of man, "He sanctified it" with the light of of the face of man. The light of man's face throughout the week isn't comparable to [his face] on Shabbat. "He blessed it" with luminaries, R' Shimon son of Yehuda the man of Acco says in the name of R' Shimon: even though the luminaries were cursed  from the Shabbat eve

...Bless it (the day) with delicacies.  Rabbeinu (Rabbi Yehudah/Rebbi) made a feast for Antoninus on the Shabbat. They brought before him prepared foods that were cold. He ate from them and found them very tasty. He (Rebbi) made a feast for him (Antoninus) on a weekday and brought before him steaming foods. He (Antoninus) said to him (Rebbi) those (the cold food on Shabbat) tasted better to me than these (warm foods). He (Rebbi) explained that the warm weekday food was missing a single spice. He (Antoninus) said to him, ‘and is there anything in the king’s treasury that is lacking? He (Rebbi) said that the food was missing Shabbat, Do you have Shabbat?

...A philosopher asked Rabbi Hoshayah: He said to him, if God so loves circumcision why did he not give it to Adam. He said to him, why does that man (you) shave the corners of your head and leave the corners of your beard? He said to him because it grew with me in folly. He said to him: if so you should blind your eyes, lop off your hand, and sever you legs since they grew with in follow. He said to him: To these words we have come wonder. He said to him: Anything created in the first six days, needs further actions, for example mustard seeds need sweetening, peas needs sweetening, wheat needs grinding, even humans need fixing.

Why did God bless Shabbat? Rabbi Berekiah says: "Because it has no partner. The first day of the week has the second, the third has the fourth, the fifth has the sixth, but Shabbat has no partner. Rabbi Samuel ben Nahman said: Because it cannot be postponed: a festival can be postponed, as well as the Day of Atonement [because these are days which a beit din must declare to be a new moon]. Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai taught: Shabbat pleased with the Holy One, Blessed be God saying: "Everyone else has a partner, but I have nothing!" God answered saying: "The community of Israel will be your partner." God continued: "And when thy stood before Sinai, God said to the Israelites: "Remember what I said to Shabbat, that the community of Israel is your partner, [in the words of scripture] "Remember Shabbat and keep it holy" (Exodus 20:8)...

Chapter 12











R. Eliezer and R. Joshua differed. R. Eliezer said: All that is in heaven was created out of heaven, and all that is on earth was created out of the earth. He proves this from the following : Praise ye the Lord [ye that were created] from the heavens; Praise ye Him, all His angels…hosts…sun…moon…etc. (Psalms 148:1); Praise the Lord [ye that were created] from the earth, ye sea-monsters…fire and hail…mountains…hills…beasts…cattle (Psalms 148:7). R. Joshua maintained: All that is in heaven and on earth was created from nought but heaven. He proves it from the following : For He saith to the snow : Be thou on the earth, etc. (Job 37:6). Just as the snow is created out of heaven, though its existence is on the earth; so everything that is in heaven and on earth was created from nought but heaven. R. Huna said in R. Joseph's name : Whatever is in heaven and on earth was created from the earth alone, as it is written, For as the rain cometh down and the snow from heaven (Isaiah 55:10): just as the rain's creation is from the earth, though it falls from heaven, so all that is in heaven and on earth was created from the earth alone. R. Judan proved it from the following : All go unto one place; all are of the dust, i.e. earth (Ecclesiastes 3:20). R. Nahman said: Even the sun's orb, as it is said, Who commandeth the sun, and it riseth not (Job 9:7).

Chapter 13



3) . . . . Rabbi Shimon Bar Yochai said: Three things are equal in importance--land, humanity, and rain.  Rabbi Levi bar Hiyya said: and the three of them each have three letters, to teach you that if there is no land, then there is no rain, and if there is no rain there is no land, and without either of them there is no humanity.

Chapter 14




Wayyiyzer: two formations, the good and the evil. For if an animal possessed two [such] formations, it would die of fright on seeing a man holding a knife to kill it. But surely a man does possess these two faculties! Said R. Hanina (rjinena) b. Idi: He bound up the spirit of man within him (Zechariah 12:1); for if that were not so, whenever a trouble came upon him he would remove and cast it from him.

Chapter 15







What was the tree, from which Adam and Eve ate? Rabbi Meir said, it was wheat. When a person lacks knowledge people say "That person has not eaten bread made from wheat even a day." Rabbi Shmuel bar Rabbi Yitzhak asked before Rabbi Zeira and said to him "Is it possible that it is wheat?" He said to him, "Yes!" He said to him, "But isn't it written, 'tree'" He said to him, "It rose like the ceders of Lebanon" Rabbi Yaakov Bar Aha said: Rabbi Nechemiah and the Rabbis disagree. Rabbi Nechemiah said, "[When we bless our bread we should say]...'the one who brings bread from the earth', since bread already came from the earth." But the Rabbis say, "'who is bringing bread from the earth' since in the future he will bring bread from the earth, as it is said, 'There will be a abundant grain in the land.' (Psalm 72:16). What does the word lefet mean? Two [scholars] disagree. They are Rabbi Hanina son of Yitzhak and Rabbi Shmuel Bar Ami. One says: lefet means there was no bread and the other says lefet means there will be no bread in the future. Rabbi Jeremiah recited the blessing before Rabbi Zeira as "The one who brings bread from the earth" and he praised him. But does that mean we hold like Rabbi Nehemiah? Rather we say it so we don't mix up the letters.

Chapter 16



Chapter 17



"I will make him a helper corresponding to him."  If he merits it - a helper; if not - an enemy.  Rabbi Joshua the son of Nechemia said: If he merits it, [his helper] will be like the wife of Rabbi Hanina the son of Hachinai; if not, like the wife of Rabbi Yossi the Galilean.  Rabbi Yossi had a wife - who was his niece - whom he disparaged in front of his students.  They said to him: Why don't you divorce her, she does you no honor!  He said to them: she has a large dowry, and I cannot divorce her.  One time he was sitting and teaching with Rabbi Eleazar the son of Azariyah, and when they finished, Rabbi Eleazar suggested that they go to Rabbi Yossi's house.  Rabbi Yossi agreed, and so they went.  When they got there, Rabbi Yossi's wife was scornful, and when she had left [the room] Rabbi Yossi looked in the pot.  He said to her: there is nothing in the pot.  She said to him: there is bread crumbs and vegetables.  He went and found chickens.  Rabbi Eleazar the son of Azariyah knew what he heard [understood that the marriage was an unhappy one].  They sat and ate [in silence].  Rabbi Eleazar said to Rabbi Yossi: Rabbi!  You said that there was only bread and vegetables, and there was chicken!  He replied: it was a miracle.  When the meal was over, he said: Rabbi, you should leave this woman, she does not bring value to your life.  He replied: her dowry is large, and I cannot divorce her.  He said: we will cover the dowry, and you can divorce her.  They did this, and he divorced her, and he found another woman to marry, who was better than the first.  When he was finished financially supporting his first wife, she found and married a guardsmen of the town.  After some time, an injury befell him [the guardsmen] and he was blinded, and she would go out with him around the streets to beg.  When they approached the street of Rabbi Yossi, she turned around.  He [due to his job] was a knowledgeable man when it came to the layout of the town, and he said to her: why do you not lead me down the street of Rabbi Yossi, I have heard it is a very generous man?  She said: I was divorced from him, and I cannot face him now.  Another time they called upon the neighborhood of Rabbi Yossi.  He became angry with her on the first and second day, and eventually he started hitting her.  The noise traveled, and they were shamed in the city.  Rabbi Yossi examined the sound, and discovered that they were disgraced.  He asked him [the former guardsmen]: why do you hit her?  He replied: every day she deprives me of [potential] income from begging.  When Rabbi Yossi heard this, he immediately brought them into his house, and supported them for the rest of his life, according to the verse: "And from your flesh do not turn away" (Isaiah 58:7).
"And the Lord God created [animals] from the earth."  It asked of Rabbi Yochanan ben Zakkai: It is written: "And the Lord said, let the earth bring forth living beings by kind" (Genesis 1:24) - what is being taught by saying "And the Lord God created all animals of the field"?  He answered them: the earlier was about creation, and the later was about gathering [to be named], like the verse says: "when you besiege a city for many days..." (Deuteronomy 20:19).  Rabbi Aha said: when the Holy One, Blessed be He, came to create the world, he consulted the angels of the heavenly court.  He said to them: "Let us make Adam" (Genesis 1:26).  They said to him: this Adam, what is his nature?  He said to them: his wisdom exceeds yours.  He brought before them the domesticated beasts, the wild beasts, and the birds.  He said to them: what are their names?  They did not know.  He brought them before Adam.  He said to him: what are their names?  Adam said: this is a ox, this is a donkey, this is a cow, this is a camel.  And you, what is your name?  Adam said to him: it is fitting that I should be called 'Adam' as I was created from the earth [adamah].  And Me, what is My name?  Adam said to Him: it is fitting to call You Adonai, as You are the master [adon] of all your creations.  Rabbi Hiyyah said: "I am God, that is my name" (Isaiah 42:8).  "That is my name" - that Adam, the first person, called me.  God returned and brought before Adam pairs [of animals].  Adam said: to each and every one there is a pair, but I have no pair!  "And for Adam no help-mate was found" (Genesis 2:20).  And why did God not create her first?  Rather, The Holy One, Blessed be He, foresaw that Adam would be charges against her, and so he did not create her until Adam expressly requested it.  Once he requested it, immediately: "And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall..." (Genesis 2:21)
"And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall."  Rabbi Joshua of Sichnin in the name of Rabbi Levi said: the beginning of a man's downfall is sleep.  When asleep, he does not engage in study or work.  Rav said: there are three types of deep sleep: the deep sleep of sleep; the deep sleep of prophecy; and the deep sleep of a trance.  The deep sleep of sleep: "And the Lord God caused a deep sleep [tardemah] to fall on Adam, and he slept" (Genesis 2:21).  The deep sleep of prophecy: "And the sun went down and a deep sleep [tardemah] fell over Avram" (Genesis 15:12).  The deep sleep of a trance: "And no one saw, and no one knew and no one awoke because all were sleeping, because the deep sleep [tardemah] of God has fallen on them" (Samuel I 26:12).  The Rabbis said: [there is a fourth type] even the deep sleep of folly, as it is written: "Because God poured upon you the spirit of deep sleep [tardemah]" (Isaiah 29:9).  Rabbi Hanina bar Yitzchak said: there are three varieties of analogy: A taste of death - is sleep; a taste of prophecy - is dreaming; a taste of the world to come - is Shabbat.  Rabbi Avin added two more: a taste of the light of heaven - is the sun; a taste of the wisdom of heaven - is Torah.
"And He took one of his ribs."  Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachman said: from one of his sides, as it says: "And for the side of the tabernacle" (Exodus 26:20).  Shmuel said: He took one rib from between two other ribs.  'From under it' was not written, rather "from under them."  Rabbi Hanina the son of Rav Idi: from the beginning of the book until now there has not been a samech, once Eve was created, Satan was created with her.  And if you want to argue that man is the one that circles, the reply is that the text is talking about the rivers [that encircle Eden].  Rabbi Hanina bar Yitzchak said: The Holy one, Blessed be He, decorated his bottom so that he would not be disgraceful like an animal.  Rabbi Ami and Rabbi Yannai; one said: He made his buttocks a cover so that he would not be pained when he sat down, and one said: He made him covers.  Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Ami; one said: he made him bury, and one said: he made him burial garments.
A certain matron asked Rabbi Yosi, saying: why did God steal [Adam's rib]?  He replied in a parable: if a person gave you a deposit of an ounce of silver in secret, and returned to you a pound of gold publicly, would that be stealing?  She said to him: so why was it done in secret?  He replied: at first, He created her, and Adam saw her full of secretions and blood.  He kept her away from him, and went back and created her a second time.  She said to him: I will add further, I was meant to marry my mother's brother, but because I grew up in the same house as him, I was unattractive in his eyes, and he went and married a different woman, who is less attractive than I am.  A story [is told] of a pious man and his wife who could not have kids.  They said: we are of no benefit to the Holy of of Blessing, so they divorced.  He went and married a wicked woman, and she made him wicked; and she went and married a wicked man, and she made him righteous.  Thus: everything is from the woman.
They asked Rabbi Yehoshua: Why does a man come out [of the womb] with his face pointing down, and a woman with her face pointing up?  He said to them: the man looks to the place he was created, and the woman looks to the place she was created.  And why does a woman need to perfume herself, and the man does not need to perfume himself?  He said to them: man is created from the earth, and the earth is never smelly.  Woman was created from bone.  It is similar to placing meat out for three days without salting it, it would become smelly immediately.  And why does a woman's voice carry, while a man's does not?  He said to them: it is similar to filling a pot with meat, no sound comes forth.  Once you put a bone into it, immediately a sound comes forth.  Why is man easily appeased, and woman is not easily appeased?  He said to them: man is created from the earth, and when you put one drop of water on the earth, it dissolves.  Woman was created from a bone, and even if you soak a bone in water for days it does not dissolve.  Why does man search for woman, and woman does not search for man?  He said to them: to what is the matter similar?  To one who lost an object - he searches for the object, while the object does not search for him.  Why does man entrust his seed to the woman [by impregnating her], and woman does not entrust seed to the man?  He said to them: it is similar to one who has a surety, and wants to find a trustworthy person to guard it.  Why does man leave [the house] with an uncovered head, while woman leaves the house with a covered head?  He said to them: [it is similar to] one who committed a sin and is embarrassed from people, and therefore leaves with a covered head.  And why do women accompany the dead first?  He said to them: because they caused death to enter the world, therefore they escort the dead first, as it says: "and after him each person will draw" (Job 21:33).  And why was woman given the commandment of niddah?  Because she spilled the blood of the first man, therefore she was given the commandment of niddah.  And why was she given the commandment of challah?  Because she disgraced the first man, who was the sanctification (challah) of creation, therefore she was given the commandment of challah.  And why was woman given the commandment of lighting Shabbat candles?  He said to them: because she put out the soul of the first man, therefore she was given the commandment of Shabbat candles.

Chapter 18

"And God built [out of] the rib" - Rabbi Eliezer said in the name of Rabbi Yossi the son of Zimra: woman was endowed with more understanding than man.  As it is taught: at eleven years and one day, her vows stick; at twelve years and one day her vows apply; and all twelve-year-olds are checked.  But for males, at twelve years and one day his vows stick; at thirteen years they apply, and all thirteen-year-olds are checked.  Rabbi Yirmiya said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Yitzchak: there are those that say the opposite, as the way of a woman is to sit in her home, and the way of a many is to go out to the marketplace and learn understanding from others.  Rabbi Aybu said, and some attribute it to the name of Rabbi Benaya, and it is [also] taught in the name of Rabbi Shimon ben Yochai: [God] adorned her [Eve] like a bride, and afterwards brought her to him [Adam].  In some places they call 'kil'ata' [braids] 'bin'yata' [net-works].  Rabbi Hamma bar Chanina said: you think that she was brought to him under a carob or sycamore tree, rather she was adorned with twenty four kinds of finery, and then brought to him, as it says: "In Eden, the garden of God you were, and all precious stones were your covering: the carnelian, the topaz..." (Ezekiel 28:13).  The Rabbis and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish; the Rabbis said: ten, and Rabbi Shimon said: eleven.  Rabbi Hamma bar Chanina and Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish both said: a general rule followed by a specific; follow the general rule by adding the specific, and it is all in the general rule - "every precious stone is your covering" is a general rule.  "Carnelian, topaz, emerald, beryl..." are the specifics.  Follow the general rule - "every precious stone is your covering."  Rabbi Levi and Rabbi Simon: one said nine, and one said ten.  The one who said ten is like the Rabbis, and the one who said nine argues that the "gold" mentioned in the verse surely does not refer to a canopy.  Rabbi Acha bar Chanina said: he made walls of gold and coverings of precious stones and pearls.  Rabbi Eleazar bar Bisna said in the name of Rabbi Aha: He even made him hooks of gold.
Rabbi Yehoshua of Sichnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi: "And He built" is written; He contemplated from where to create her.  He said: I will not create her from the head, lest she be haughty; I will not create her from the eye, lest she be coquettish; I will not create her from the ear, lest she be an eavesdropper; I will not create her from the mouth, lest she be a chatter-box; I will not create her from the heart, lest she be jealous; I will not create her from the hand, lest she be a thief; I will not create her from the leg, lest she be a run-about; rather, I will create create her from the most modest place on a person, as even when a person stands naked this place is covered.  And as He created each and every limb of the woman, He would say to her: be a modest woman, be a modest woman!  Nevertheless, "And they have disregarded all of my counsel" (Proverbs 1:25).  I did not create her from the head, and yet she is haughty, as it says: "And they walk with stretched-forth necks" (Isaiah 3:16).  And not from the eye, yet she is coquettish, as it says: "and with wanton eyes" (ibid.).  And not from the ear, and yet she is an eavesdropper, as it says: "And Sarah listened from the entrance of the tent" (Genesis 18:10).  And not from the heart, and yet she is jealous, as it says: "And Rachel was jealous of her sister" (Genesis 30:1).  And not from the hand, and yet she is a thief, as it says: "And Rachel stole the idols" (Genesis 31:19).  And not from the leg, and yet she is a run-about, as it says: "And Dinah went out..." (Genesis 34:1).
Rav Hisda said: He built her an extra store-room [womb] more than the man, wider at the bottom and narrower at the top, so that it could receive fetuses.  "And He brought her to the man" - Rabbi Avin said: happy is the townsperson, who has the King as a friend.
"And Adam said: this is now..."  Rabbi Yehuda bar Rebbi said: In the beginning He created her, and [Adam] saw that she was full of secretions and blood and separated her from him, and He returned and created her a second time.  As it says: "this is now" this is the woman this time.  This is now for me the one who will be my partner in the future.  As it says: "A golden bell (pa'amon) and a pomegranate" (Exodus 28:34).  "This is now" - this is she that perturbed me all night.  It was asked before Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish: why was Adam not tired from all his dreams, but was tired from this one [Eve]?  He said to them: because at the beginning of her creation she was just a dream, as it says: "bone of my bones, flesh of my flesh."  Rabbi Tanhuma said: if a man marries a relative, of him it is written: "bone of my bones."  "This one shall be called 'woman' because she was taken from man."  From here we learn that Torah was given in Hebrew.  Rabbi Pinchas and Rabbi Hilkiya in the name of Rabbi Simon said: just as the Torah was given in Hebrew, so too the world was created in Hebrew.  You have heard it said: 'man' and 'woman' [in other languages as distinct words, unrelated to each other], so why ish and isha [the words for 'man' and 'woman' in Hebrew, which are related to each other]?  Because this word falls from this word [and, hence, the grammatical inconsistency is explained if the Torah was given in Hebrew].
"Therefore a man will abandon."  It was taught: a convert that converted and was married to his sister, whether from the mother or the father - it is acceptable, according to Rabbi Meir.  The Sages say: from the mother it is acceptable, from the father, it must be established that he does not worship idols.  A refutation arose: does it not say: "And moreover, she is my sister, the daughter of my father..." (Genesis 20:12)!  He said to them: reply to them by their own reasoning.  Rabbi Meir refuted: "Therefore a man will abandon his father and his mother" (Genesis 2:24).  Rabbi Yochanan said: they explained this verse "therefore a man will abandon his father and his mother" the one who supports his father, the one who supports his mother.  Rabbi Abahu refuted: does it not say: "And Amram took Yocheved his cousin" (Exodus 6:20)!  Rabbi Shimon the son of Rabbi Abahu said: from here would we learn that  at the time of the children of Noah, Israel acted differently, before the giving of the Torah!?  Rabbi Levi said: we explain the verse "therefore a man will abandon..." the one who is supported by his father, or by his mother.  Rabbi Abahu in the name of Rabbi Yochanan said: the children of Noah, in matters of marriage are obligated, in matters of engagement are not.  Rabbi Yonah in the name of Rabbi Shmuel said: if a whore is in the marketplace, and two men come to her, the first is exempt and the second is liable, because he was sleeping with a married woman.  Did the first one intend to acquire her [as a wife]?!  It is said: intercourse at the time of the children of Noah acquires, even not in the way of [later] Judaism.  And how do we know that they did not divorce?  Rabbi Yehuda in the name of Rabbi Simon and Rabbi Chanin in the name of Rabbi Yochanan said: they did not divorce, or they both divorced each other.  Rabbi Yochanan said: his wife divorced him and gave him a bill of divorce.  Rabbi Hiyya taught: an idol-worshipper that divorced his wife, and she went and married someone else, and then they both went and converted to Judaism, I do not apply to them the verse "The first husband that sent her away cannot..." (Deuteronomy 24:4).  Rabbi Aha in the name of Rabbi Hanina bar Pappa said: in the whole book of Malachi it is written 'Hashem, Lord of Hosts' but here it is written 'the God of Israel' as it says: "For I hate sending away, said Hashem, God of Israel" (Malachi 2:16) - as if to say, God's name only rests on Israel.  Rabbi Haggai said: When Israel was exiled, the women's faces were blackened from the sun, and they were left and the men went and married Amonite women.  They went and circled the altar, crying, as Malachi says: "And this do a second time" (Malachi 2:13) - a second time in relation to Shittim.  "Cover with tears the altar of Hashem with wailing and sighing" (ibid.), the Holy One Blessed be He said: who will accept these tears and wailing, since you stole and did violence to and took it's beauty from her, now you will send her away?  And how do we know that they were fastidious about sexual impropriety like Israel?  As it says: "And he cleaved to his wife" (Genesis 2:24) and not the wife of his friend, or another man, or an animal.  Rabbi Shmuel and Rabbi Abahu and Rabbi Eleazar in the name of Rabbi Hanina said: a child of Noah who comes to his wife unnaturally is liable for the death penalty.  Rabbi Assi said: every crime written about the children of Noah is not judged on the metric of positive and negative commandments; rather, they all require the death penalty.  How do we know this?  "And he cleaved to his wife and they became as one flesh" (ibid.).
"And they were both naked."  Rabbi Eleazar said: there were three who did not wait for their contentment even six hours, and these are they: Adam, and Israel, and Sisra.  Adam, as it says: "and they were not embarrassed" (Genesis 2:25) - six hours had not passed, and he was content.  Israel, as it says: "And the nation saw that Moses delayed" (Exodus 32:1), when six hours had passed and Moses had not appeared.  Sisra, as it says: "Why does his chariot delay in coming?" (Judges 5:28) - every day he would come in three or four hours, and today six hours have past and he is not here - these are all cases related to "and they were not embarrassed."  "And the snake was crafty" (Genesis 3:1) - the text only needed to continue with "And Hashem God made for Adam and his wife..." (Genesis 3:21).  Rabbi Yehoshua ben Karchah said: to teach you which temptation the snake sprung on them - he saw them engaged in the way of the world, and desired here.  Rabbi Yaakov of the village of Hannin said: to not pause the story of the snake.

Chapter 19

"And the snake was crafty."  It is written: "With great wisdom is great vexation" (Ecclesiastes 1:18)...
"And he said to the woman: God has also said"  Rabbi Hanina ben Sinsan: Four were they that opened with 'af' [also], and they were: the snake, the chief baker, the congregation of Korach, and Haman.  The snake: "And he said to the woman also" (Genesis 3:1).  The chief baker: "Also me in my dream" (Genesis 40:16).  The congregation of Korach: "Also, not to the land" (Numbers 16:14).  Haman: "Also Esther didn't bring" (Esther 5:12).


Rabbi Yose bar Zimra said, "Three things were said about this tree: That it is good to eat, beautiful to the eyes and it adds wisdom. And all three of them were said in one verse (Genesis 3:6): "And the woman saw that it was good" - from here, that is good; "and that it was desirable to the eyes" - from here that it was beautiful to the eyes; "and the tree was pleasant to behold (<i>lehaskil</i>)" - from here that it adds wisdom, as it is stated (Psalms 89:1), "A psalm of wisdom (<i>maskil</i>) of Eitan HaEzrachi." "And she took from its fruit and ate" - Rabbi Eibi said, "She squeezed grapes and gave them to him." Rabbi Simlai said, "She came to him with a settled mind. She said to him, 'What do you think, I will die and a different Chava will be created for you? "There is not anything new under the sun" (Ecclesiastes 1:9)! Or maybe you think that I will die and you will sit around alone? "He did not create it a waste, But formed it for habitation" (Isaiah 45:18)!'" Our rabbis say, "She began to cry to him with her voice." "Also" is to include [something else] - she fed [it to] the beasts and the animals and the birds. They all listened to her except for one bird, and its name was <i>chol</i>; as you say (Job 29:18), "and I have length of days like the <i>chol</i>." In the House of Rabbi Yannai, they said, "It lives for a thousand years; and at the end of a thousand years, fire comes out of its nest and burns it and leaves the size of an egg from it, and it comes back and grows limbs and lives." Rabbi Yudan beRebbi Shimon says, "It lives for a thousand years and at the end of a thousand years, its body withers and its feathers fall, and there remains the size of an egg from it, and it comes back and grows limbs."



And the Lord God called  to man - how did it happen/ where were you? Yesterday you went in my ways, and now in the opinion/ways of the serpent. Yesterday [your vision] was from one end of the world to the other , and now its limited to within the garden. R. Abbahu said the name of R. Hanina: it is written (Hosea 6) and they like Adam transgressed on the covenant. they [Israel],like Adam. Just as Adam - I brought him into the Garden of Eden, I commanded him, and he transgressed my commandments. And so I judged him with banishment and divorce, and I lamented him, "Eicha." I brought him into Gan Eden, as it says: and I placed him in Gan Eden. I commanded, as it states: and God the Lord commanded man. He transgressed the commandment, as it says: did you eat from the tree which I commanded not to eat from. I judged him with banishment, as stated: God the Lord sent him from the garden. I judged him with divorce, it is written: He drove [garesh] out the man. I Lamented over him "Eicha", as stated: And he called the God to man, And said unto him, where are you [Ayeka, Eicha in text]. So too, his sons I brought into Palestine and commanded and they transgressed on my orders, I judged them with banishment and divorce, and I lamented on them Eicha. I brought into Palestine, as written (Jeremiah): and I will bring you into the land of Carmel. I commanded , as it says (Exodus Z): and they thou shalt command the children of Israel. they transgressed on my commandments, as is said (Daniel T.), and all Israel transgressed on your Torah. I judged them with banishment, as written (Jeremiah XVI): Send them from my face and they left. I judged them divorce, as is said (Hosea H): from my house I will divorce them. I lamented on them Eicha, as written (Eicha 1) How did she sit.

Chapter 20

And Adam called his wife's name Eve --- Chava i.e. life She was given to him for an adviser, but she played the eavesdropper like the ﻿serpent.  He showed her how many generations she had destroyed. R. Aba interpreted it: The serpent was thy [Eve's] serpent [i.e. seducer], and thou art Adam's serpent. "Because She was the Mother of all Living.  R. Simeon b. Eleazar said: That means that she is associated with (im) all living. It was taught: If [her husband] becomes wealthy, she rises with him; if he becomes poor, she does not descend with him. R. Simon said: The mother of all living  means, the mother of all life. For R. Simon said: Throughout the entire one hundred and thirty years during which Adam held aloof from Eve the male demons were made ardent by her and she bore, while the female demons were inflamed by Adam and they bore, as it is written, If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the afflictions of the children of man-Adam (II Sam. 7:14), which means, the children of the first man." (The reason for the view that house spirits are benevolent is because they dwell with him [man], while the opinion that they are harmful is based on the fact that they understand man's evil inclinations. He who maintains that the spirits of the field are benevolent does so because they do not grow up ﻿with him, while as for the view that they are harmful, the reason is because they do not comprehend his evil inclinations.)

Chapter 21






<b>And now lest he send his hand:</b> Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said, "It teaches that the Holy One, blessed be He, opened an opening of repentance for him: 'and now' - and 'and now' is always [referring to] repentance, as it is stated (Deuteronomy 10:12), 'And now Israel, what does the Lord, your God, etc.' And it states, 'lest'; and 'lest' is always [meaning], no (such that Adam refused to repent). The Holy One, blessed be He, said, 'He will also send his hand and eat from the Tree of life - it is a wonder; if he will eat, he will live forever!' Therefore, 'And the Lord God sent him out of the Garden of Eden.' Once He sent him away, He began to lament, 'Behold, man.'"


Chapter 22

…Happy is he who is master over his transgressions, but his transgressions are not master over him…

Chapter 23

"And Cain knew his wife ..." "Their inward thought is that their houses shall continue forever" (Psalms 39:12), Rabbi Yudan and Rabbi Pinchas, Rabbi Yudan said: why did the wicked believe that "their houses would continue forever" (ibid.)? "they called their lands after their own names" (ibid.) - Tiberias after the name Tiberius; Alexandira after the name Alexander; Antochia after the name Antiochus.  Rabbi Pinchas said: "their inward thought is that their houses shall continue forever," tomorrow their houses will become their graves "their dwelling places for all generations" (ibid.), because their are not living and not judged - and not only that, but they called their lands after their own names.  "And he built a city, and he called the name of the city, like the name of his son, Enoch" (Genesis 4:17)
"And Enoch begat Erad..." Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: They all refer to rebellion.  Erad - I will drive him out from the world.  Mechuya'el - I will erase him from the world.  Metusha'el - I will weaken him from the world.  Lemech - What do I need with Lemech and his descendents?  "And Lemech took for himself two wives, one was named Adah and the second was named Tzilah" (Genesis 4:19).  Rabbi Azariah said in the name of Rabbi Yehudah bar Simon: this is what the men of the generation of the Flood would do: each of them would take two wives, one for procreation and one for pleasure.  The one who was for procreation would sit as if she was a widow in her own lifetime (in the lifetime of her husband), and the one that was for pleasure would drink a cup for sterility so that she did not bear [children], and would sit by him adorned like a prostitute.  As it is written: "He devours the barren that do not conceive, and does not do good to the widow" (Job 24:21).  Know that among them the best was Lemech, and he took two wives, as it says "And Lemech took for himself two wives, one was named Adah" - because she became pregnant [adah] "and the second was named Tzilah" - because she sat in his shade [tzel].
...And the sister of Tubal-Cain was Na’amah. Rabbi Abba bar Kahana said: Na’amah was Noah’s wife. Why was she called Na’amah? Because all of her deeds were pleasant (ne’imim). The Rabbis said this is a different Na’amah. Why was she called Na’amah? Because she beat on a drum to draw people to idol worship.

Chapter 24







Rabbi Tanchuma said in the name of Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Menachem in the name of Rav said... Ben Azzai said: “These are the generations of Adam" is a great principle in the Torah. Rabbi Akiva said: This is a great principle of the Torah: "You shall love your neighbor as yourself" (Lev. 19:18). Thus, one should not say, “Since I am scorned, I should scorn my fellow as well; since I have been cursed, I will curse my fellow as well.” Rabbi Tanchumah said, if you act thus, realize who it is that you are willing to have humiliated - "the one who was made in the likeness of God." Rabbi Tanchuma says, “If you do so, you should know who are you scorning — ‘in the likeness of God He created him.’”

Chapter 25



Chapter 26

"And Noach was 500 years old." - It is written (Psalms 1:1) "Fortunate is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked." "Fortunate is the man", that's Noach. "who in the counsel of the wicked he does not walk, and in the ways of sinners he does not stand [and in the company of mockers he does not sit]." Rabbi Yehudah and Rabbi Nechemia [disagreed]. Rabbi Yehudah said: [the three parts of the verse] refer to three generations - the generation of Enosh, the generation of the Flood, and the generation of the Division [i.e., of the Tower of Babel]; Rabbi Nechemia said: [They refer to] the generation of the Flood and the generation of the Division, but the generation of Enosh was small. According to Rabbi Yehudah's opinion: "Fortunate is the man who does not walk in the counsel of the wicked", that's the generation of Enosh. "and in the ways of the sinner he does not stand," that's the generation of the Flood. "and the company of mockers he does not sit," that's the generation of the Division. "Rather, in God's Torah is his desire" (Psalms 1:2), that is [i.e., refers to] the seven commandments he was commanded. "and in his Torah he meditates day and night"  - he comprehended one matter implied by [lit. "from within"] another matter: he [Noach] said [to himself], "What is the reason the Torah increased [the number of] ritually pure [beasts], more than the [number of] ritually impure [beasts]? Was it not because He wants [me] to sacrifice from them?" Immediately, "and he took from all the ritually pure beasts..." (Genesis 8:20). "and he shall be like a tree planted by water brooks" (Psalms 1:3) = G-d planted him in the ark. "which gives its fruit at the proper time" - that is [i.e., refers to] Shem, "its leaves shall not wither" = that is Ham, "and all that it does shall prosper" - that is Yefet.

Noah sired three sons, Shem, Ham, and Yafet. And was not Yafet the oldest? Rather, at first you seek the one who was righteous (Shem), and was circumcised when he was born, and who had his name singled out by the Holy-One-Blessed-Be-He, that Avraham would come from his lineage in the future, as would the one who would serve as High Priest, and the Beit Hamikdash would be built in his region. Shimon bar Huta said, "(Because of) the numerical value of his letters, the Holy-One-Blessed-Be-He suspended for the generations of the flood until the (generation of) scattering, three hundred and forty years (the value of Shem's name in gematria)."  
that means males and beasts.

Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



<b>God is good to all and His mercies are upon all of His works (Psalms 145:9):</b> Rabbi Levi said, "'God is good to all,' upon all, that He is their maker." Rabbi Shmuel said, "'God is good to all and His mercies' - upon all that  are His traits, He has mercy.” Rabbi Yehoshua of Sakhnin said in the name of Rabbi Levi, "'God is good to all' and His merciful ones He give to His creatures." Rabbi Tanchuma and Rabbi Abba bar Avin [said] in the name of Rav Acha, “Tomorrow a famine will arrive and the creatures will have mercy, these upon those, and the Holy One, blessed be He, will be filled with mercy on them.” In the days of Rabbi Tanchuma, Israel required a fast (to bring about rain). They came to [Rabbi Tanchuma and] said to him, “Rabbi, decree a fast.” [So] he decreed a fast on the first day, on the second day, on the third day and rain did not fall. He got up and expounded to them. He said to them, "My children, have mercy, these upon those, and the Holy One, blessed be He, will be filled with mercy on you." While they were still distributing charity to the poor, they saw a man giving money to his ex-wife. They came to [Rabbi Tanchuma] and said to him, "Rabbi, how are we sitting here [while] there is a sin here." He said [back] to them, "What did you see?" They said to him, "We saw Mr. x give money to his ex-wife." They sent for them and they brought them in front of the community. [Rabbi Tanchuma] said to him, "What is she to you?" He said [back] to him, "She is my ex-wife." He said to him, "Why did you give her money?" He said to him, "Rabbi, I saw her in distress and I was filled with mercy on her." At that time, Rabbi Tanchuma lifted his head towards above and said, "Master over the worlds, just like this one that does not have an obligation to sustain [her] saw her in distress and he was filled with mercy for her, all the more so, You, that it is written about You, 'Compassionate and Merciful' and we are the children of Your friends, Avraham, Yitschak and Yaakov, will You be filled with mercy on us." Immediately, rains fell and the world was irrigated. Our rabbi (Yehuda Hanassi) was sitting, involved in Torah in front of the synagogue of the Babylonian [Jews] in Tzippori [when] a calf passed in front of him [and] was going to be slaughtered and started to yell out as if to say, "Save me." He said to it, "And what can I do for you? That is what you were created for." [As a result, Rabbi Yehuda Hanassi] had toothaches for thirteen years. Rabbi Yoss bar Avin said, "[During] those entire thirteen years that [he] had toothaches, no pregnant woman had a miscarriage in the Land of Israel and no birthing mother had pain. After some time, a crawling animal passed in front of his daughter and she wanted to kill it. He said to her, "My daughter, let it go, as it is written, "and His mercies are upon all of his works." Our rabbi had great modesty and said, "I will do anything that people tell me except what the sons of Batira did to my forefather - that they came down from their greatness (office) and brought him up; and [even] if Rabbi Huna, the Exilarch, came here, I would get up in front of him. Why? As he is from [the tribe of] Yehuda and I am from Binyamin, and he is from the males of Yehuda and I am from the females." Rabbi Chiya the Great said to him, "And behold, he is [waiting] outside." [Rabbi Yehuda Hanassi]'s face changed colors.  And when he saw that his face changed colors, [Rabbi Chiya] said to him, "It is [Rabbi Huna]'s coffin." He said [back] to [Rabbi Chiya], "Go out and see who needs you outside." He went out and did not find a person and he knew that he was excommunicated - and there is no excommunication less than thirty days. Rabbi Yossi bar Avin said, "[During] the entire thirty days that Rabbi Chiya the Great was excommunicated from our rabbi, he taught Rav, the son of his sister, the principles of the Torah." And what are the principles of the Torah? They are the laws of the Babylonians. At the end of thirty days, Eliyahu - may he be remembered for good - came in the likeness of Rabbi Chiya the Great to our rabbi and put his hand on his teeth and he became healed. When Rabbi Chiya the Great came to our rabbi, he said to him, "What did you do to your teeth?" He said [back] to him, "From the time that you put your hand on them, they became better. He said, "I do not know what this is." When he heard this, he began to treat him with respect and he brought close the students and brought up [Rabbi Chiya] to the top. Rabbi Yishmael bar Yose said, "And [should he] come closer than I?" He said [back] to him, "God forbid, such should not be done in Israel." Our rabbi was teaching the praises of Rabbi Chiya the Great in front of Rabbi Yishmael bar Yose - he said, "He is a great man, he is a holy man." One time, [Rabbi Yishmael bar Yose] saw [Rabbi Chiya] in the bathhouse and [the latter] did not humble himself before him. He said to [Rabbi Yehuda Hanassi], "Is this your student that you have been praising? I saw him in the bathhouse and he did not humble himself before me." He said to him, "Why did you not humble yourself before him?" Rabbi Chiya said [back], I was looking at the homilies (aggadot) of Psalms." Once [Rabbi Yehudah Hanassi] heard this, he gave him two students to go with him to the dark places, that he not get confounded and lose himself. Another explanation: "God is good to all, etc." "And God remembered Noach, etc." - Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachmani said, "Woe to the evildoers who switch the [Divine] trait of mercy to the [Divine] trait of [strict] justice. In every place that it states 'the Lord,' it is the trait of mercy: 'The Lord, the Lord, merciful and compassionate God' (Exodus 34:6). And [yet] it is written (Genesis 6:5-6), 'And the Lord saw that the evil of man on the earth was very great[...] And the Lord regretted that He had made man on the earth, and the Lord said, "I will erase, etc."' Happy are the righteous who switch the trait of [Divine] justice to the [divine] trait of mercy.  In every place that it states '<i>Elohim</i>,' it is the trait of mercy: 'Judges (<i>Elohim</i>) you shall not curse' (Exodus 22:27); 'to the judges (<i>elohim</i>) the matter of both of them will come' (Exodus 22:8). And [yet] it is written (Exodus 2:24), 'And God heard their cries and God remembered His covenant'; '(Genesis 30:22), 'And God remembered Rachel'; 'And God remembered Noach.' And what memory did He remember for him? That he fed and sustained them all of the twelve months in the ark." "And God remembered Noach" - and justice requires it, from the merit of the pure ones that he brought with him into the ark. Rabbi Eliezer says, "[Noach] was named corresponding to his sacrifice, as it states, 'And the Lord smelled the pleasant (<i>nichoach</i>) fragrance.'" Rabbi Yose bar Chaninah [says], "He was named corresponding to the resting of the ark, as it states, 'And the ark rested (<i>tanach</i>) on the seventh month, etc.'" Rabbi Yehoshua says, "'Will not cease' (Genesis 8:22) implies that they ceased."

Chapter 34














"One who sheds the blood of a human, by a human shall his blood be shed (Genesis 9:6)."  Rabbi Hanina says, All of these [instances] are adjudicated according to the Noachide laws: By [the testimony of] one witness, by [the ruling of] one judge, without witnesses and without warning, by means of an agent, by means of [the death of] an embryo.  By one witness and one judge, it says, "One sheds the blood of a human, by a human, (singular), shall his blood be shed."  Without witnesses and without warning,it says, "One who sheds the blood of a human, by a human shall his blood be shed."  By means of an agent, it says, "One who sheds the blood of a human -- his blood shall be shed." By means of [the death of] an embryo, it says, "One who sheds the blood of a human [in a person]."  Rabbi Yehudah ben Rabbi Simon says, Even one [who murders] by strangulation, it says, "One who sheds the blood of a human, etc. [in a person]"  Rabbi Levi says, Behold one that killed, but was not killed.  When will he be killed?  When a perso`n comes [for divine judgment], it says, "One who sheds the blood of a human, by a human who comes shall his blood be shed."  Rabbi Akiva expounded, Every person who sheds blood, it is as if he has diminished the Image.  What is the reason? "One who shed the blood of a human, by a person shall his blood be shed."  Why? "Because in the image of God, He made man." (ibid.)  Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah expounded, Every person who refrains from procreation, Scripture regards him as having diminished the Image.  What is the reason? "Because in the image of God He made humans." And it is written after that, "But you, be fruitful and multiply -- swarm over the earth and multiply."  (Ibid. 9:7)  Ben Azzai expounded, Everyone who refrains from procreation, Scripture regards it as though he has shed blood and diminished the Image.  What's the reason?  "One who spills the blood of a human." Why? "Because in God's image."  And what's written after that?  "But you, be fruitful and multiply." Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah said, Appropriate are the words that issue from the mouth of one who does them.  Ben Azzai expounded well, but did not fulfill well.  He [Ben Azzai] responded to him, I [act as I do] because my soul craves Torah, but let the world be sustained through others.

Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38

And all of the land was one language: Elazar son of Yose bar Zimra began: (Psalms 59): Do not kill them lest my people be unmindful: with your power make wanderers of them: The rabbis interpret this verse as referring to Doeg and Ahitophel. David said: Do not kill Doeg and Ahitophel, "lest they forget my people"--lest the generations that follow forget. "With your power make well for them" -- carry them away. And bring them down--bring them down from their greatness. And what will He do for us? "O our shield, the Lord." "Because of their sinful mouths, the words on their lips." 





"And it came to pass, as they journeyed east" (Genesis 11:2). [Is it possible that] They journeyed from the east to go to the east? Rabbi Eleazar bar Rabbi Shimon said: they journeyed from the Ancient One [kadmon] of the world. They said: we cannot persist with Him and with His Godliness. "The found a plain" (ibid.) Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Nehemia [disagreed], Rabbi Yehuda said: all of the idol worshipers gathered to see which plain would contain them all, and eventually they found it. And Rabbi Nehemia said: "they found" "If it concerns the scorners, He scorns them" (Proverbs 3:34). "And they dwelt there" (Gen. 11:2) Rabbi Yitzchak said: every place where you find [the word] "dwelt" [yeshiva], Satan jumps. Rabbi Helbo said: in every place where you find satisfaction [nachat ruach] Satan accuses. Rabbi Levi said: in every place where you find eating and drinking Satan accuses.





"And Haran died in the presence of his father Terah" (Gen. 11:28). Rabbi Hiyya the grandson of Rabbi Adda of Yaffo [said]: Terah was a worshipper of idols. One time he had to travel to a place, and he left Abraham in charge of his store. When a man would come in to buy [idols], Abraham would ask: How old are you? They would reply: fifty or sixty. Abraham would then respond: Woe to him who is sixty years old and worships something made today - the customer would be embarrassed, and would leave. A woman entered carrying a dish full of flour. She said to him: this is for you, offer it before them. Abraham took a club in his hands and broke all of the idols, and placed the club in the hands of the biggest idol. When his father returned, he asked: who did all of this? Abraham replied: I can't hide it from you - a woman came carrying a dish of flour and told me to offer it before them. I did, and one of them said 'I will eat it first,' and another said 'I will eat it first.' The biggest one rose, took a club, and smashed the rest of them. Terah said: what, do you think you can trick me? They don't have cognition! Abraham said: Do your ears hear what your mouth is saying? Terah took Abraham and passed him off to [King] Nimrod. They said [to the king]: let us worship the fire. Abraham said to them: [rather] let us worship water, for it extinguishes fire. Nimrod agreed: let us worship water. Abraham continued: if so, let us worship the clouds, which provide water. Nimrod agreed: let us worship the clouds. Abraham continued: if so, let us worship the winds that scatter the clouds. Nimrod agreed: let us worship the winds. Abraham continued: if so, let us worship humans who are filled with wind [air]. Nimrod replied: You're just speaking words - I only worship fire. I will throw you into it, and the God you worship can save you from it. Haran was hidden and was of two minds, saying [to himself]: if Abraham is victorious, I will say I am with Abraham, and if Nimrod is victorious, I will say I am with Nimrod. When Abraham was through into the fiery furnace and saved, they asked him [Haran]: who are you with? He replied: I am with Abraham. They took him and threw him into the fire, and his insides burned up and he died before his father Terah, as it says: "And Haran died in the [lit.] on the face of his father Terah" (Gen. 11:28).

Chapter 39

(1) YHVH said to Abram, "Go you forth from your land…" … Rabbi Yitzchak said: this may be compared to a man who was traveling from place to place when he saw a bira doleket/castle aglow/lit up (full of light/in flames). He said, "Is it possible that this castle lacks a person to look after it? The owner of the building looked out and said, “I am the owner of the castle.” Similarly, because Abraham our father said, “Is it possible that this castle has no guide, no one to look after it?," the Holy Blessed One looked out and said to him, “I am the Master of the Universe.” … Hence, God said to Avraham, Lech Lecha.
(2) "Adonai said to Avram."  (Gen. 12:1)   R' B'rechia opened:  "Your ointments yield a sweet fragrance, Your name is like finest oil," (Song 1:3).  Said R' B'rechia, "To what was Avraham analogized?  To a flask of balsam liquid with a closely fitting lid, resting in a corner, and whose aroma was not wafted; once it was moved, its aroma was wafted.  Thus said the Holy One, Blessed be He, to Avraham:  Move yourself from one place to another, and your name will be enlarged in the world. "


(5) R' Azaria opened: "We tried to cure Babylon But she was incurable. Let us leave her and go, Each to his own land" (Jer. 51:9).   "We tried to cure Babylon" -- in the generation of Enosh.  "But she was incurable" -- in the generation of the flood.  "Let us leave her and go" -- in the generation of the dispersion.   "Each to his own land" -- "Adonai said to Avram, 'Go forth.'"
Rabbi Yehuda and Rabbi Nehemia [disagreed]. Rabbi Yehuda said: "Get yourself out" (Gen. 12:1) ['lech' is written] twice, once from Aram Naharayim and once from Aram Nachor. Rabbi Nehemia said: "Get yourself out" ['lech' is written twice, once from Aram Naharayim and from Aram Nachor and once because God flew him [Abraham] from the between the Pieces and brought him to Haran, as it is written: "Your people offer themselves willingly in the day of your warfare" (Psalms 110:3), I was with you when you were in my service going down to the fiery furnace. "In the day of your warfare" at the time when you gathered for me all of the soldiers and the inhabitants. "In adornments of holiness" (ibid.) from the adornments of the world I sanctified You. "From the womb of the dawn" (ibid.) from the womb of the world You free me to [serve] You. "Yours is the dew of your youth" (ibid.) since Abraham our Father was afraid, and said: 'Suppose that there is sin in me, since I worshiped idols all those years.' The Holy Blessed One replied: "Yours is the dew of your youth," just as the dew evaporates, so do your sins; just as the dew is a symbol of blessing forever, so are you a symbol of blessing forever, as it is written: "And I said: 'Oh that I had wings like a dove! Then would I fly away, and be at rest." (Psalms 55:7) Why "like a dove"? Rabbi Azariah in the name of Rabbi Yudan said: Because all of the flyers, when they tire they rest on rocks or on trees, but this dove, when it flies and tires, it jumps with one of its wings and flies with the other. "Lo, then would I wander far off" (Psalms 55:8), wanderings, movement after movement. "I would lodge in the wilderness Selah" (ibid.), it is better to lodge in the wilderness of the Land of Israel and not to lodge in the castles of outside Israel, and if you wish to say that Abraham was not glad about the word of God [and therefore did not leave for Israel immediately], but why did he not leave? Because he had not yet inherited. Once he had inherited "And Abraham went just as God has spoken to him, and Lot went with him" (Gen. 12:4). Rabbi Levi said: at the time that Abraham was walking about Aram Naharayim and Aram Nahor, he saw [people] eating and drinking and lazing about. He said: if only I have no portion of this land. Once he arrived at the promontory of Tyre, he saw [people] engaged in hoeing at hoeing time and weeding at weeding time. He said: if only I have a portion in this land. The Blessed Holy One said to him: "To your offspring I will give this land." (Gen. 12:7)





“And the souls that they had made in Haran.” Said Rabbi Elazar ben Zimra: Even if every creature on earth conspired to create (out of nothing) even one mosquito, they could not give it a soul--and you say “the souls that they had made.” Therefore (they must be) they must be those who lived with them and converted. And it it meant “converted” why did it say “made?” In order to teach you that each one who brings an idol worshipper and converts him, it is as though he created him. And why did it say “that they made” rather than “that he made?” Said Rav Huna: Abraham would convert the men, and Sarah would convert the women. 

Chapter 40



Chapter 41

HAD FLOCKS, AND HERDS, AND TENTS. R. Tobiah b. R. Yitzchak said: He had two tents, viz. Ruth the Moabitess and Naamah the Ammonitess. Similarly it is written, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters that are found (Gen. XIX, 15)3: R. Tobiah said: That means two ‘finds’, viz. Ruth and Naamah. R. Yitzchak commented: I have found David My servant (Ps. LXXXIX, 21): where did I find him? In Sodom.

Chapter 42

“Avram the Hebrew was told.” Rabbi Yehudah, Rabbi Nechemyah, and the sages [disagree]. Rabbi Yehudah says: the entire world is on one side and he is on the other side [the word for “side” in Hebrew is מעבר , which stems from the same root עבר ]. Rabbi Nechemyah says: Because he is of the descendants of Ever [the son of Shem, the son of Noah]. The sages say: he is from the other side of the river and that he speaks in the Hebrew tongue.



אל עמק שוה "To the Valley of Shaveh": Rabbi Berachia and Rabbi Chanina said in the name of Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachman: [It was called that] because all of the idolaters became unanimous [השוו], cut down cedars and built a great stage, and brought [Avraham] there to rise him up, and they said praises before him, saying [Bereishit 23:6]: "Hear us, my lord, [you are a prince of God in our midst,]" etc. They said to him, "You are our king! You are our prince! You are our god!" He said to them: "The world does not lack its King, nor does it lack its God."

Chapter 43



Chapter 44

After these things the word of Hashem came to Abram in a vision, saying, etc. (Psalms 18:31) "As for God — His ways are perfect; the Word of Hashem is tried; a shield is He for all who take refuge in Him." If His way is perfect, how much more is He Himself! Rav said: Were not the mitzvot given so that man might be refined by them? . Do you really think that The Holy One of Blessing cares if an animal is slaughtered by front or by the back of the neck? Therefore, mitzvot were only given to make humans better.

Chapter 45

Why were the matriarchs barren? For God desires their prayers and looks forward to their conversations… He said: They are beautiful, they are rich; if they have children, when will I hear from them?

Chapter 46



Chapter 47



Chapter 48

As he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day. Rabbi Berekhiah said in Rabbi Levi’s name: It is written: he sat. He wished to rise, but God said to him: Sit—you are a symbol to your children. As you sit while the Shekhinah (God’s Presence) is standing, so will your children sit and the Shekhinah stand. When Israel enters synagogues and study halls and recites the Shema’, they sit in My honor, and I will stand over them.

Chapter 49

 ...





"And the men turned (faced) from there" (Gen. 18:22) - this proves that angels do not have a back [of the head] (i.e. they went one way but could still face the other). "And they went towards Sodom but Abraham remained standing before Hashem"  Rabbi Simon said: "This is a correction of the scribes [rather than saying] that the Shechinah (Divine Presence) would wait for Abraham ."
(9) 	"Far be it from You."  R' Yudan said, "It is far from You"; "It is outside for You."  R' Aha said, "Halila" "Halila" twice.  There is a desecration of the name of Heaven in the matter.  R' Aba said, It does not say "to do this thing"; rather, it says "to do a thing like this."  Not it, nor anything like it, nor anything less than it.  R' Levi said, Two individuals said the same thing, Avraham and Iyov.  Avraham: "Far be it from You to do such a thing, to bring death upon the innocent as well as the guilty"  Iyov:  "It is all one; therefore I say, 'He destroys the blameless and the guilty.'"  Avraham received a reward for it, and Iyov was punished for it.  Avraham spoke well-ripened thoughts; Iyov spoke hastily and angrily:  "It is all one; therefore I say, 'He destroys the blameless and the guilty.'"  R' Hiyya bar Aba said, There is a confusion of questions here.  Avraham said,"Far be it from You to do such a thing, to bring death upon the innocent as well as the guilty," and the Holy One Blessed be He says, "so that innocent and guilty fare alike."  Would He suspend [judgment] against the wicked for the sake of the righteous?  Oh that they were righteous, but they are only righteous men of an inferior quality, as R' Yohanan said, All tzaddikim mentioned in connection with S'dom are written "tzaddikam."  This is the opinion of R' Yohanan, as R' Yohanan said, "So our elders and all the inhabitants of our country instructed us" -- it is written "z'kananu" -- uncultured old men, i.e., shameful old men.  R' Yehoshua ben Levi said, Annex my deeds and they will increase the total to 50.  R' Yehuda ben R' Simon said, Aren't You the Righteous One of the world?  Annex Your deeds and they will increase the total to 50.  R' Yehuda ben R' Simon said, This is what Avraham said to Him:  With a flesh-and-blood king, one can take an appeal from a duke's decision to a provincial governor, and from a provincial governor to a military governor.  But with You, because there is no one to take an appeal to, won't You do justice?  R' Yehuda ben R' Simon said, When You sought to judge Your world, You gave it over to two, Remus and Romulus, so that if one of them wanted to do something, the other could stay the first one's hand.  But You, with respect to Whom there is no one to stay Your hand, won't You do justice?  R' Ada said, You swore that You would not bring a flood to the world, and now You are weaseling out of the oath -- a flood of water You are not bringing, but a flood of fire You are bringing.  If so, You have not fulfilled Your oath.  R' Levi said, ...

Chapter 50


"But He is at one with Himself, and who can turn him? And what His soul desireth, even that He doeth." (Job 23:13)  It was taught: One angel does not carry out two commissions, and two angels do not carry out one commission.  And you say "two"!? (Genesis 19:1) Rather, Michael said his tidings and departed, Gabriel was sent to overthrow Sodom, and Raphael to rescue Lot.

Chapter 51





His wife looked behind her - Rabbi Isaac said, for she sinned with salt.  That night when the angels came to Lot, what was she doing? Going to all her neighbors and saying to them, give e salt, because we have guests.  And her intention was that the men of the city would come to know of them. Therefore "she became a pillar of salt."
......

Chapter 52



Chapter 53



Chapter 54

And Abraham rebuked Avimelech: R. Yosi ben R. Hanina said: Rebuke leads to love, as it says, rebuke a wise man and he will love you. Such indeed is R. Yosi ben Hanina’s view, for he said: Love unaccompanied by rebuke is not love. Resh Lakish said: Rebuke leads to peace; hence, ‘And Abrhaman reproved Avimelech’. Such is his view, for he said: Peace unaccompanied by rebuke is not peace.

Chapter 55



Another opinion: “The Lord tests the righteous.” – This is Abraham – “Sometime after these things, God tested Abraham.”  R. Avin expounded: (Ecclesiastes 8:4) “Since a king's word is supreme, who can say to him: ‘What are you doing?’” – R. Avin said: [This may be compared] to a teacher who commands his student, saying to him: (Deuteronomy 16:19) “You shall not judge unfairly,” but [the teacher himself] judges unfairly; (Deuteronomy 16:19) “Do not take a bribe,” but [the teacher himself] takes a bribe; Do not lend on interest, but [the teacher himself] lends on interest.  His student said to him: Rabbi, you said to me: Do not lend on interest, but you lend on interest?  [Is it] permitted to you but forbidden to me?  [The teacher] said to him: I said to you: Do not lend on interest to a Jew, but you may lend on interest to an idol worshipper, as it is written: (Deuteronomy 23:21) “You may lend on interest to a foreigner, but you may not lend on interest to your brother [Israelite].”  Thus Israel said before The Holy One Blessed be He: Master of the Universe, you wrote in your Torah: (Leviticus 19:18) “You shall not take vengeance or bear a grudge,” but you take vengeance and bear a grudge, as it is said: (Nahum 1:2) “The Lord is vengeful and fierce in wrath.  The Lord takes vengeance on His enemies.”  The Holy One Blessed be He said to them: I wrote in the Torah: (Leviticus 19:18) “You shall not take vengeance or bear a grudge against your countrymen,” but I take vengeance against idol worshippers – (Numbers 31:2) “Avenge the Israelite people on the Midianites.”  It is written: (Deuteronomy 6:16) “Do not test the Lord” – [but] “God tested Abraham.”     

Chapter 56







“There is no generation that does not have a man like Abraham, like Isaac, like Jacob… and like Moses.” But this refers only to isolated individuals. And the Torah was given to all; it “speaks of the majority.” So how can we say that to every Jew it is open to act like Moses or like the Fathers, and that in this respect they should follow the Fathers?
Another explanation: Rabbi Yitschak said, "At the time that Avraham sought to bind Yitschak, his son, [the latter] said to him, 'Father, I am a young man and I am concerned lest my body shake from fear of the knife and I will trouble you, and lest the slaughtering will be invalid and it will not be considered a sacrifice for you. Rather, tie me very well.' Immediately, ‘and he bound Yitschak.' Could he really tie up a man of thirty-seven (a different version: of twenty six years)? Rather, it was with his agreement. Immediately. 'And Avraham sent his hand.' He sends his hand to take the knife and his eyes brings down tears and the tears fall onto the eyes of Yitschak from the mercy of his father. And nonetheless, the heart was happy to do the will of his Maker. And the angels gathered in many groups above them. What did they yell out? 'The ways have become desolate, the wayfarer has ceased; He has rescinded His covenant; He has become disgusted with the cities' (Isaiah 33:7) – He does not desire Jerusalem and the Temple that he had in mind to bequeath to the children of Yitschak. 'He did not consider a man' – merit did not stand Avraham well: 'No creation has importance in front of Me.'" Rabbi Acha said, "Avraham started to wonder, 'These words are only words of wonder. Yesterday, you told me (Genesis 21:12), "Because in Yitschak will your seed be called." And [then] you went back and said, "Please take your son." And now You say to me, "Do not send your hand to the youth." It is a wonder!' The Holy One, blessed be He, said, 'Avraham, "I will not profane My covenant and the utterances of My lips, I will not change" (Psalms 89:35) – When I said, "Please take your son," I did not say, "slaughter him," but rather, "and bring him up." For the sake of love did I say [it] to you: I said to you, "Bring him up," and you have fulfilled My words. And now, bring him down.’ (A different version: They said a parable about a king that said to his friend, 'Bring up your son to my table.' His friend brought him up and his knife was in his hand. The king said, 'And did I say to you, "Bring him up to eat him?" I said to you, "Bring him up"' – [and this was] because of [the king's] love.) This is [the meaning of] what is written (Jeremiah 19:5), 'it did not come up on My heart' – that is Yitschak."

And Abraham called the name of the place "Hashem Yireh- God will see". Rabbi Yochanan said "he said to Him: Master of Worlds, at the hour that you said to me 'Take please your son, your only son', I had what to respond yesterday. You said "For with Yitzchak etc. (will I make your line great) but then "Take please your son"! God forbid that I don't do as you've asked me; instead, I conquered my mercy to do Your will.  May it be your will, GOD our god, that in the hour when the sons of Isaac come (before You) because of transgressions and bad deeds, that the Akiedah be remembered (for their benefit), and may You be filled with Mercy on them!  Abraham called it "Yireh", as it says "And Abraham called the name of the place Hashem Yireh. Shem called it Shalem, as it says "And Malchitzedek, the king of Shalem..."(Genesis 17) The Holy One, Blessed be He, said "If I call it Yireh, as Abraham called it, then Shem, who was a righteous man, will be hurt-- but if I call it Shalem, then Abraham, who was a righteous man, will be hurt. Instead, I call it Yerushalayim (Jerusalem), as they called it together: Yireh Shalem. Jerusalem.......

Chapter 57



Chapter 58


..."The sun rises and goes down" (Ecclesiastics 1:5). Rabbi Aba bar Kahana said: Don't we know that the sun rises and goes down? Rather (this is what it means): When the Holy One of Blessing causes the sun of a righteous person to set, he causes the sun of his fellow to shine forth. The day that Rabbi Akiba died, our rabbi (Judah the Prince) was born and it was written about him "The sun rises and the sun goes down." On the day that our rabbi died Rabbi Ada Bar Ahava  was born and it was written about him "The sun rises and the sun goes down." On the day that Rabbi Ada Bar Ahava died, Rabbi Avin was born and it was written about him "The sun rises and the sun goes down." On the day that Rabbi Avin died, his son Rabbi Avin was born. The day that Rabbi Avin died, Aba Hoshaya from Traya was born. The day that Aba Hoshaya  died Rabbi Hoshaya was born and it was written about him "The sun rises and the sun goes down." Before the sun of Moses set the sun of Joshua shone forth as it is written, "God said to Moses, take Joshua Son of Nun" (Numbers 27:18). Before the sun of Joshua set the sun of Itaniel son of Kenaz shone forth as it is said, "Itaniel son of Kenaz took it" (Judges 1:13). Before the sun of Eli the priest set, the sun of Samuel shone forth, "the lamp of God had not yet gone out and Samuel lay on the sanctuary of God" (1 Sam 3:3). Rabbi Yochanan said, "like a perfect calf." Before the God causes the sun of Sarah to set, he causes the sun of Rachel to shine forth. For first it says "Behold Malkah also bore children" (Gen 22:20) and after "and the life Sarah was one hundred years..."
Rabbi Akiva was once sitting and lecturing, and the community [his students] was falling asleep. To arouse them, he said: How could Esther rule over one hundred and twenty seven provinces? It should be that Esther, a descendant of Sarah who lived to one hundred and twenty seven, to rule over one hundred and twenty seven provinces.

And Avraham came to eulogize Sarah-From where did he come? Rabbi levi said: He came to Sarah from the burial of Terach. Rabbi Yossi said to him: And did not the burial of Terach precede the burial of Sarah by two years?! Rather, from where did he come? From Mount Moriah.

Chapter 59


...





..."and I will make you swear by Adonai, the God of heaven [and the God of earth], etc. Rabbi Pinchas said: Before I made the One known to his creatures [humanity], he was "the God of heaven," but now that I have made God known to his creatures, the One is also "God of the earth."...

Chapter 60
















"And Isaac brought her into the tent of Sarah, his mother-" All the days that Sarah was alive, a cloud was connected (lit. tied) to the entrance of her tent. When she died, the cloud stopped [resting at her tent.] And when Rebecca came, the cloud returned. All the days that Sarah was alive, the doors were open wide. When she died, the wideness stopped. And when Rebecca came, the wideness returned. And all the days that Sarah was alive, there was a blessing in her dough, and when Sarah died, that blessing ended. When Rebecca came, [the blessing] returned. All the days that Sarah was alive, there was a candle that would burn from Sabbath Eve to [the next] Sabbath Eve, and when she died, the candle stopped [burning for so long]. And when Rebecca came, [the week-long flame of the candle] returned. And as soon as [Isaac] saw her, that she did the deeds of his mother, separating her <em>challah</em> in purity and separating her dough in purity, he brought her into the tent. Rabbi Yudan said, "The Torah teaches you, that if a man has grown-up sons, he should marry them off first and then he should marry. Who do you learn [this teaching] from? From Abraham: first, "And Isaac brought her into the tent of Sarah his mother," and afterwards, "And Abraham took another wife, and her name was Keturah."

Chapter 61




<b>And her name was Keturah:</b> Rav said, "She is Hagar." Rabbi Nechemiah said to him, "And is it not written, 'he added.'" He said to him, "[That signifies that] he [now] married her according to the [Divine] word; like that which you say (Isaiah 8), 'And the Lord added to speak to me more.'" He said to him, "And is it not written, 'And her name was Keturah?'" He said to him, "[It is] since she was fragrant (<i>mekuteret</i>) with commandments and good deeds." He said to him, "And is it not written, 'And to the sons of the concubines that Avraham had?'" He said, "It is [actually] written, 'concubine' (in the singular, such that there only be one concubine - Hagar)." "While he was still alive (<i>chai</i>)" - [this is a reference to] the one that sat by the well and said to the Life (<i>chai</i>) of the worlds, "Look at my embarrassment!" Rabbi Berakhia said, "Even though you say (Genesis 21:14), 'and she went and strayed in the wilderness, etc., [such that] you would say that she was suspected with any [other man]; hence we learn to say, 'And her name was Keturah' - like a type of knot (<i>ketur</i>) like this, [with which] he seals a storehouse and opens it with a seal, [that is] tied and sealed." Bar Kapra said, "The addition of the Holy One, blessed be He, is greater than the main part: Kayin was was the main part and as a result of Hevel being the addition - as it is is written (Genesis 4:2), 'And she added to give birth' - he and his two twins were born; Yosef was the main part, and as a result of it being written, addition, with Binyamin, he established ten [children], as it is written (Genesis 46:21), ' And the children of Binyamin were Bela and Becher, etc.'; Er was the main part, and as a result of Shelah being [born] with the language of addition, he established ten [courts], behold, it is written in I Chronicles 4:21, 'And the sons of Shelah the son of Yehudah were Er, the father (a term that is also used for the head of a court) of Lecha, and Ladah, the father of Maresha, and the families of the house Avodat HaButs of the house of Ashbea'; the main part of the years of Iyov were only seventy years, [and] one hundred and forty years were added to him, as it is written (Job 42:16), 'And Iyov lived after this one hundred and forty years';  the main part of the reign of Chizkiyahu was only fourteen years, and fifteen years were added to him, as it states (Isaiah 38:), 'behold, I will add fifteen years to your days; Yishmael is the main part, and as a result of the children of Keturah being [born] with the language of addition, 'And she gave birth for him to Zimran, etc.'" 


<b> And to the sons of the concubines, etc.:</b> In the days of Alexander the Macedonian (the Great), the Yishmaelites came to appeal against Israel about the birthright - and with them came two evil families: the Canaanites and the Egyptians. They [the Israelites] said, "Who will go and litigate with them?" G'vi'ah ben Kosem said, "I will go and litigate with them." They said to him, "Be careful that you not ensure the land for them." He said, "I will go and deliberate with them. If I win, so much the better. And, if not, you will say, 'What is this inferior one, that he should stand himself up for us?'" He went and litigated with them. Alexander the Macedonian said to them, "Who is claiming against whom?" The Yishmaelites said, "We are claiming against them, and from their Torah do we come against them: It is written (Deuteronomy 21:17), 'But he will recognize the firstborn the son of the disliked wife.' And by right Yishmael should take a double portion!" G'vi'ah ben Kosem said, "My lord king, may a man not do what he wants for his children?" He said to him, "Yes." And [G'vi'ah] said [back] to him, "And is it not written, 'And Avraham gave all that he had to Yitzhak!'" They said to him, "And where is the deed of sending away, that [proves that] he distributed [from his assets] to [the rest of ] his children?" He said to him, "'And to the sons of Avraham's concubines, Avraham gave gifts.'" And [the Yishmaelites] left from there shamefaced. The Canaanites said, "From their Torah do we come against them. In every place [there], it is written, 'to the Land of Canaan,' 'the Land of Canaan'; they should give us our land!" G'vi'ah ben Kosem said to [Alexander], "My master, the king, does a man not do to his slave what he wants?" He said to him, "Yes." [G'vi'ah] said [back], "What is written? 'Cursed is Canaan, the slave of slaves, etc.' (Genesis 9:25) - behold the land is ours and they are slaves to my lord king!" And [the Canaanites] left from there shamefaced. Egypt said, "From their Torah do we come against them. Sixty multitudes went out from us laden with vessels of silver and vessels of gold, as it is written (Exodus 12:36), 'and they despoiled Egypt'; they should give us our silver and our gold!" G'vi'ah ben Kosem said to him, "My lord king, sixty myriad persons [worked] for them for  210 years - among them were silversmiths and among them were goldsmiths who take for their wage, a <i>dinar</i> a day!" The philosophers (wise men) sat and calculated and did not get to a hundred years before the Land of Egypt [was forfeited] to the treasury [to repay its debt]. And [the Egyptians] left from there shamefaced.  [Alexander] sought to go up to Jerusalem. Cuthites went and said to him, "Be careful, as they do not allow you to go into their House of the Holy of Holies (the inner sanctum of the Temple)." And when G'vi'ah ben Kosem realized [this], he made [Alexander] two felt shoes and put on them two jewels worth 20,000 silver [coins]. And once they reached the Temple Mount, [G'vi'ah] said to him, "My master, the king, "Take off your shoe, and shod yourself with two [felt] shoes, since the floor [here] is smooth, so that your feet not slip." And once they reached the Holy of Holies room, [the sages] said to [Alexander], "Thus far we have the right to enter; from here on, we do not have the right to enter." [Alexander] said to [G'vi'ah], "When I leave, I will flatten your forehead [meaning, make him stand upright, as G'vi'ah was a hunchback] (alt. version: your hump)!": He said [back] to him, "If you do that, you will be called an expert physician and take much remuneration!" <b>and he sent them away from Yitzhak, his son:</b> [Avraham] said to [the sons of the concubines], "As far as you can go to the East, go to the East, so that you not get burned by the coal of Yitzhak." But [in the case of] Esav, since he came and grappled with Yaakov, [Esav] took what was [coming to him as a punishment] from under his hand - this is what is written (Isaiah 23:7-8), "Is this your joyous one; in the early days, in its antiquity, its legs brought it to tarry far away. Who advised this on Tsur (Tyre), the crowning, etc." Rabbi Eliezer said, "All times that Tsur is written in Scripture fully (with all of its letters), the verse is speaking about the city-state of Tsur; when it is incomplete (without the letter, <i>vav</i>, as it is here), the verse is speaking about Rome (which is associated with Esav)." "The crowning" - Rabbi Abba said, "They surrounded it in [the formation of] a crown." And Rabbi Yannai said in the name of Rabbi Shimon, the son of Rabbi Yannai, "They surrounded it like a type of [fence made of] thornbushes."  

Chapter 62



Chapter 63









"And after that his brother emerged" (Genesis 25:26). A [roman] general asked someone from the family of Siloni, "Who will reign after us?" [In response,] he brought blank parchment, took a reed, and wrote on it: "And after that his brother emerged, holding onto the heel [of Esav]". They said [as a comment:] See how ancient words become new in the mouth of a Sage! [Furthermore,] it teaches how much pain was suffered by that righteous man. 
<b>And the boys grew up</b> (Genesis 25:27): Rabbi Levi said, "There is a [relevant] parable about a myrtle and a wild rose bush growing one on top of the other. And once they grew and blossomed, this one gives its fragrance, and this one its thorn. So [too,] all of the thirteen years they would both walk to the school and they would both come [back] from the school. After thirteen years, this one would walk to the study halls, and this one would walk to the house of idolatry." Rabbi Elazar said, "A man must take care of his son until thirteen years. From then on, he needs to say, 'Blessed is the One who exempted me from the punishment of this one.'"<b>and Esav was a man who knew trapping:</b> He would trap people with his mouth -  "Did you not steal, who stole with you? And did you not kill, who killed with you?" Rabbi Abahu said, "A fieldsman, a trapper - he would trap in the home, he would trap in the field: In the home, 'How do we take the tithes from salt?' In the field, 'How do we take the tithes from straw?'" Rabbi Hiya said, "He made himself ownerless like a field. Israel said in front of the Holy One, blessed be He, 'Is it not enough that we have been subjugated to the seventy nations, but rather [must] we also [be subjugated] to this one who has been penetrated like a woman.' He said [back] to them, 'I too will extract retribution from him with the same expression - that is what is written (Jeremiah 49:22), "and the heart of Moav [Edom]’s warriors in that day shall be like the heart of a woman in travail."'" <b>and Yaakov was a plain man that sat in tents</b> - two tents, the study hall of Shem and the study hall of Ever. <b>And Yitschak loved Esav, since he placed venizen in his mouth</b> (Genesis 25:28): Good roasted meat fir his mouth and a good cup [of wine] for his mouth. <b>and Rivkah loved Yaakov:</b> Each time she would hear his voice, she would increase upon her love for him.  

Chapter 64



Chapter 65



Chapter 66



Chapter 67

And Itzhak feared a great fear. It is written (Proverbs 29:25) "Man's fear will be a trap but the one who trusts G-d will be raised". Fear, the one that Ruth frightened Boaz, at it is said (Ruth 3:8) "the man was startled, and turned himself". "Will be a trap": In truth, he should have cursed her, but "the one who trusts G-d will be raised". He gave in his heart and blessed her, and said: "Blessed are you to G-d, my daughter". Fear, the one that Yaakov frightened Itzhak, as it is said: "And Itzhak feared a very great fear. "Will be a trap": he should have cursed him, but "the one who trusts G-d will be raised". And he said: "He will also be blessed".
And Itzhak feared a great fear etc. - Rabbi Hama bar Hanina: very, more than the fear he feared on the altar. Said: Who is this done broker between me and the place, so that Yaacov will take the blessings, to Rivka they said. Rabbi Yochanan said: When one has two sons, one went out and one came in, will he fear?! But, when Esav entered to his father, hell entered with him. Rabbi Acha said: The walls of the house started to shake/boil. this what he said: "Who, where", who is it that will be baked here, me, or my son, Yaakov? Said God: Not you, nor your son, but is the one hunting game. Hunting game: Said Rabbi Elazar Bar Shimon: Hunter, how were you hunted, door-builder, how is your own door broken ?! This is what it said (Proverbs 12): "The slothful man shall not hunt his prey" The rabbis said: G-d will not be late and will not prolong for the liar and his pray. Rabbi Eliezer the son of R. Jose says: What is not scorch? Will not extend God a liar and a side ?! As R. Yehoshua ben Levi whole day was made a party to deer and languages, and an angel came and permissiveness, and poultry and troublemaker, and an angel came and Mfrihn. And why? (Proverbs L): human capital expensive and laborious, to Sheba Jacob it happen in heaven, and will take the world's main blessings diligent him. Rabbi Hanina ben Pappa Ask the Rabbi Acha, said to him: What is written, utterly precious human capital? He said, the hand of the righteous is a hard-working, not taking from Vikram's time to come in this world. And food from Rabbi Judah and Rabbi Nehemiah, Rabbi Yehuda says: all that was created during the six days of creation. Rabbi Nehemiah says: all good, he revised in the future. Said: Essentially what Hacillach? Said: I do not know, but I was tasting bread taste, flavor meat, fish flavor, taste grasshoppers, taste all the delicacies in the world. Rabbi knees: because flesh mentioned, immediately cried. Said: I am one bowl of lentil fed them dainty and took his birthright, you Shacillach meat more so! Rabbi Levi said: According to our father was Isaac not be afraid to say: I did not say well, I did not broken the reactor ?! Because he said his birthright taken, said my good health:
Rabbi Isaac said: He [Isaac] was going to curse him [Jacob], but the Holy One, blessed be He, cautioned: "Beware, for if you curse him, you curse your own soul, for you said: 'Cursed be they who curse you' (Genesis 27:29)." Rabbi Levi said: six things serve a human - three are under one's control, and three are not under one's control. The eye, the ear and the nose are not under one's control, as one sees what is not wished for, one hears what is not desired, and one smells what is not wanted. The mouth, the hand, and the foot are under one's control. If one wishes to, one studies Torah, while if one wants to one speaks badly, and if one wants to one blasphemes and reviles. Regarding the hand, if one wishes one can offer charity, while if one wants one can rob, and if one desires one can murder. Regarding the feet, if one wishes one can go to the houses of theatre and the houses of circus, while if one wants one can go to the houses of assembly [synagogues] and the houses of study. And in the moment that one merits, the Holy One, blessed be He, makes those which one usually controls, no longer in one's control. The hand: "but the hand that [Jeroboam] stretched out against him withered" (Kings 13:4); The mouth: "now he [Jacob] must remain blessed" (Genesis 27:33); The foot: "My son, do not set out with them...for their feet run to evil" (Proverbs 1:15-6). 
When the date did the wordsand Ury, Getting to Yes, 101-3. of his father - said Rabbi Hanina: all those who say that God and the mast is, Itootron people Mohi! But, extending baking and on Delia. Scream called Jacob and Esau, it is written: When the date did the words of his father and cried cry. And where was repaid him ? Shushan, written (Esther d); and cried a bitter cry greatly. Your brother came deceitfully Rabbi Yochanan said, comes wisdom teachings. and he said, as his name called Jacob and Iakveni Lakish said he began rubbing his throat, Mann Dmheich and throw a rock from him. and he said, best and Iakveni, his birthright took, and I said nothing to him, and is now taken my blessing and I said nothing to him ?! non his? Now my blessing, the capacity utilization:

Chapter 68


The following dialogue, one of many, is reported in the name of R. Yosi ben Halafta, one of the Mishnah’s most prominent sages, and an unnamed Roman woman of rank. She asked R. Yosi, "In how many days did God create the world?" "In six," he answered. "And since then," she asked, "what has God been doing?" "Matching couples for marriage," responded R. Yosi. "That’s it!" she said dismissively. "Even I can do that. I have many slaves, both male and female. In no time at all, I can match them for marriage." To which R. Yosi countered, "Though this may be an easy thing for you to do, for God it is as difficult as splitting the Sea of Reeds."
Whereupon, she took her leave. The next day the aristocrat lined up a thousand male and a thousand female slaves and paired them off before nightfall. The morning after, her estate resembled a battlefield. One slave had his head bashed in, another had lost an eye, while a third hobbled because of a broken leg. No one seemed to want his or her assigned mate. Quickly, she summoned R. Yosi and acknowledged. "Your God is unique and your Torah is true, pleasing and praiseworthy. You spoke wisely"(Bereshit Rabba, 68:4).
...Rabbi Yehudah bar Simon began: (Psalms 68:7) "God maketh the solitary to dwell in a house". A matron asked R. Yosi bar Halfa, saying to him: "How many days did it take the Holy One Blessed be Him to create the world?" He said to her: "[to] Six days, as it is written (Exodus 20) "Because six days God made the heavens and the earth." She said to him: "What has He been doing since that hour and now?" He said to her: "The Holy One blessed be He sits and matches matches; the daughter of this one to this one, the wife of this one, to this one, the money of this one, to this one."  She said to him: "And this is His occupation! Even I could do so! How many servants, how many maidservants do I have.  In an easy moment I could match them." He said to her: "If it is easy in your eyes, it is as difficult in the eyes of the Holy One blessed be He as splitting the Red Sea."








...And he took stones of the place - R. Judah and R. Nehemiah , and the Rabbis. Rabbi Yehuda said he took 12 Stones. God decreed that he establish twelve tribes. Jacob said; Abraham did not establish them , Isaac did not establish them, if the twelve stones join together, I know that I will merit twelve tribes. Once they did he knew he was going to merit establishing the twelve tribes . Rabbi Nehemiah said he took 3 stones. Jacob took three stones and said : God placed  his name on Abraham, and on Isaac.  I, if the stones join together, I know that God is the unifying name for me.  And since joined, he knew that God would unify his names with Jacob. The Rabbis said that the minimum of the plural of stones is 2. Abraham produced negative attributes/waste- Ishmael and the sons of Keturah . And Isaac produced Esau and his generals. I, if you join these 2 stones together, I know that I will not produce any negative attributes in my descendants.
...And he dreamed and behold there was a ladder -- Rabbi Abuhu said: The words of dreams do not ascend and do not descend. Once a man went before Rabbi Yossi bar Halafta. He said: I saw in my dream, they said to me, "?????" He [Rabbi Yossi] said: "????". He said to him: "No! He said to him: "..." He said to him: "I don't have 20!" He said to him: "And if you don't have 20, count from their heads to their tails, and from...".... Bar Kapra taught: There is no dream that does not have an interpretation. Behold a ladder, this is a sheep. Placed on the earth, that is the altar (Exodus 20), Make me an altar of earth. And it's head reaches the heavens, those are the offerings, whose scent rises to the heavens. And behold the angels of God, those are the high priests. Rising and descending on it, that rise and descend with a sheep. And behold God is standing on it, (Amos 9): I have seen God standing on the altar. The rabbis interpret it as Sinai: He dreamed and behold there was a ladder, that is Sinai. Resting on the ground, (Exodus 19) and they stood at the bottom of the mountain. And its head reached the heavens, (Deuteronomy 4) And the mountain burned with fire unto the heart of heavens.....

Chapter 69


Rabbi Chama Bar Chanina opened with the following verse: Iron sharpens iron (Proverbs 27:17). Rabbi Chama Bar Chanina said: A knife will only become sharpened only at the side of another. So too, a Torah scholar can only become sharpened by a friend. "Iron sharpens iron and a person sharpens the face of his neighbor." This is referring to Jacob. When our father Jacob stood together (play on sharpened) with his friend, the Shekinah attached itself (or sharpened) to him. As it says "Behold Adonai stood upon him" (Genesis 38:13).
... ... Rabbi Yochanan said: The wicked, their existence depends on their gods. As it says "And Pharaoh dreamt; and he was standing upon the river" (Genesis 41:1). But the righteous, their G-d's existence depends on them. As it says "Behold G-d stood upon him" (Genesis 38:13). Rabbi Shimon ben Lakish said: The patriarchs they themselves were the Divine Chariot, As it says  "And G-d ascended from upon Abraham" (Genesis 17:22). "And G-d ascended from upon him" and "Behold G-d stood upon him".

Chapter 70












"Now when Jacob saw Rachel...Jacob went up and rolled the stone from the well’s mouth..." (Genesis 29:10). R. Yochanan said: [He rolled the stone] like one removes a stopper from the opening of a flask. "And Jacob kissed Rachel" (Genesis 29:11) All kissing is obscene, except in three cases: the kiss of high office, the kiss of reunion, and the kiss of parting. The kiss of high office: “Samuel took a phial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him” (1 Sam 10:1). The kiss of reunion: “So he went, and met him at the mountain of God, and kissed him” (Exodus 4:27). The kiss of parting: “And Orpah kissed her mother-in-law” (Ruth 1:14). R. Tanhuma said: The kiss of kinship too, as it says “And Jacob kissed Rachel” – because she was his kinswoman.”

Chapter 71


Another answer: (op. cit. 145) "God supports all those who have fallen" - these are the barren, whose [status] have "fallen" within their households.  And "straightens the bent" - when the Holy One, Blessed be He rewards them with children, they straighten up [in joy.] Similarly, Leah was hated by her household, and when the Holy One, Blessed be He visited her [and gave her pregnancy], she was straightened. That is the same concept by "And God saw that Leah was hated" - "that Leah was hated" - that she behaved in the manner of the "hated", since she was supposed to marry "the hater" [, Esav] (other mss. read "Assessed by the hater") since that was the custom, the firstborn [Esav] marry the firstborn [Esav] and the younger one [Ya'akov] marry the younger one [Rachel]. Therefore Leah cried and said: "May it be your will, God, that I do not become the possession of an evildoer." R' Huna said: Davening is a strong force, that it annulled the decree, and not only that, but that it made her come before her sister [for marriage. Because of this] everyone would mock her: The unemployed people mocked her, the travelers mocked her, and even the ladies behind their backs mocked her, saying, "This Leah, her inside is not like her outside; she appears righteous but is not really righteous. For if she were righteous she would not have cheated her sister [and would have let her marry first.] Rabbi Chanin in the name of Rabbi Shmuel son of Rabbi Yitzchak said: When Yaakov our Forefather saw matters, that Leah had "cheated" her sister, he made up his mind to divorce her, but when she was blessed with children, he said: "To the mother of <i> these </i> I am divorcing?" And in the end he admitted he was wrong, and that is the meaning of the verse: (Genesis 47) "And Yisrael [Yaakov] bowed low at the head of the bed," [and head of the bed is a euphemism for Leah, as she was the first one of his conjugal bed.] "And Rachel was barren," said Rabbi Yitzchak, Rachel was the main part of the household, as it says, "And Rachel was barren  <i>(akarah)</i>" - It's main part <i>(ikrah)</i> was Rachel. Said Rabbi Abba son of Cahana, since most of the diners [at Ya'akov's table] were Leah's [progeny, as a courtesy] they named Rachel as the main part, as it says, "And Rachel was barren  <i>(akarah)</i>" - It's main part <i>(ikrah)</i> was Rachel. Rabbi Shimon bar Yochai said: Since all these matters [i.e. helping Leah cheat the system] were done by Rachel, therefore the Children of Israel were called by her name, (Jeremiah 31): "Rachel cries for her children," and there was no end to her name, as her children's names lived on, as it says in (Amos 5): "Perhaps the Lord of Hosts will have compassion on the remnant of Joseph [a son of Rachel]" - now her son's name was recalled. And her son's name did not die out either, as it says (Jeremiah 31) "How precious is my son Ephraim [, Joseph's son and Rachel's grandson."
"

Chapter 72



Chapter 73



Chapter 74







God came to Laban the Aramean in a dream that night – What is the difference between the prophets of idol worshippers and the prophets of Israel? Rabbi Chema Bar Chanina and Rabbi Yissachar of Kfar Megdi answered: Rabbi Chema Bar Chanina said, "The Holy One Blessed Be He appears to the prophets of idol worshippers only in half-speech, as it says, 'God chanced upon Bilaam' (Bamidbar 23)." Rabbi Yissachar of Kfar Megdi said, "This language of 'chanced upon (vayiKaR)'  connotes impurity, as it is used, 'If there will be amongst you a man who is not clean [because of a] nocturnal emission (miK'Reh lilah)' (Devarim 23)." But to the prophets of Israel, God speaks in full-speech, in language of affection, in holy language, in language that the ministering angels praise, calling to one another and saying, "Holy". Rabbi Yossi Bar Chanina said, "The Holy One Blessed Be He only appears to the prophets of idol worshippers at times when it is typical for people to be alone, as it is written (Iyov 4), 'In the thoughts of visions at night, when sleep falls on people ... a word was secretly conveyed to me etc.'" Rabbi Elazar said in the name of Rabbi Menachem, "(Mishlei 15) 'God is far from the wicked' – these are the prophets of idol worshippers. 'And the prayer of the righteous He will hear' – these are the prophets of Israel. What is the difference between the prophets of idol worshippers and the prophets of Israel? Rabbi Chanina Bar Papa and Rabbi Si'mon answered: Rabbi Chanina Bar Papa said, "Like a king and his beloved that are in a parlor. Each time the [King] requests, he speaks with his beloved. (Alternative version: Like a king and his beloved that are in a parlor, with a curtain between them. Each time he requests to speak with his beloved, he folds the curtain and speaks with his beloved.)" Rabbi Si'mon said, "Like a king that has a wife and a concubine. When he wants to visit his wife, he comes in public. When he wants to visit his concubine, he comes in secret. Similarly, The Holy One Blessed be He only reveals himself to idol worshippers at night: 'God came to Bilaam at night.'; 'God came to Avimelech in a dream at night'; 'God came to Laban in a dream at night. He said to him, "Watch yourself"-even if you say things for [Yaakov's] benefit, he will think they are bad'. 'Watch yourself, speaking to Yaakov good or bad.'"

Chapter 75











When Jacob called Esau 'my lord,' the Holy One, blessed be He, said to him: 'You have abased yourself and called Esau "my lord" eight times. I will raise up eight kings of his descendants before your descendants,' as it says, And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before there reigned any king over the children of Israel (Gen. 36:31).

Chapter 76



Chapter 77


Rabbi Chunya said, "He appeared to him in the image of a shepherd. This one had a flock and this one had a flock. This one had camels, and this one had camels. He said to him, "Take across what is yours, and after that, I will take across what is mine." Jacob, our father, took across what was his, and said, "Let us return and let us see, lest we forgot something." After he returned, "a man wrestled with him" (Genesis 32:25)."
Rabbi Chama bar Chanina said, "He was the ministering angel of Esav. And that is [what he meant] when he said to him, 'For this have I seen your face as I saw the face of God and you have accepted me' (Genesis 33:10). There is a parable about an athlete that got up and wrestled with the son of the king. He lifted his eyes and he saw that the king was standing behind him and [so] he fell to the ground in front of [the son]. This is what [is meant by that which] is written, 'and he saw that he could not overcome him.'" Rabbi Levi said, "'And he saw' the Divine Presence 'and he could not overcome him.'" Said Rabbi Berachia, "We do not know who won, whether it was the angel or whether it was Yakov. And from that which it is written, 'and a man wrestled (<i>vayitabek</i>, the root of  which contains the letters that spell dust) with him,' prove who was covered in dust - the man that was with him.' Said Rabbi Chananya bar Yitschak, "The Holy One, blessed be He, said to him, 'He is coming against you and he has five charms in his hand: his merit, the merit of his father, the merit of his mother, the merit of his grandfather, and the merit of his grandmother - measure yourself [and see] if you can stand even against his merit.' Immediately, 'And he saw and he could not overcome him.' There is a parable of a king that had a wild dog and a tamed lion. And the king took his son and endeared him to the lion, [such that] if the dog would take him on, the king would say to him, 'The lion was not able to stand in front of him and you want to take him on?' So [too], if the nations of the world will come to take on Israel, the Holy One, blessed be He, will say to them, 'Your ministering angel was not able to stand in front of him and you want to take on his children?'" "And he touched the hollow of his thigh" - he touched the righteous men and women, the prophets and prophetesses, which were to arise from him in the future. And which is this? The generation of persecution (<i>shemad</i>). "And he touched the hollow of Yakov's thigh" - Rabbi Berachia and Rabbi Eliezer [disagreed about this]: Rabbi Eliezer said, "He pressed it down." Rabbi Berachia said in the name of Rabbi Assi, "He split it like a fish." Rabbi Nachman bar Yakov said, "He separated it from its place, as it is written (Ezekiel 23:18), 'and my soul was separated etc... like my soul was separated' [in which the context shows that the verb for touching also means separating]." Said Rabbi Chanina bar Yitschak, "That whole night both of them were striking each other, the shield of this one across from the shield of that one. Once the sun rose, 'And he said, send me away from here as the sun has risen.'

Chapter 78



Chapter 79



Chapter 80



Chapter 81



Chapter 82



Chapter 83



Chapter 84

...AND A CERTAIN MAN FOUND HIM: Rabbi Jannai said: He was met by three angels for scripture says, And a certain man found him...and the man asked him...and the man said.  LET US GO TO DOTHAN: For such are the designs of the Almighty AND THEY SAW HIM FAR OFF: They said, “Let us kill him by inciting the dogs against him.” AND THEY SAID ONE TO ANOTHER BEHOLD THE DREAMER COMES: The Rabbi said, “they exclaimed, Behold he is coming wrapped in his dreams”. Rabbi Levi said, “They exclaimed that he was going to ensnare them into serving foreign overloads.” COME NOW THEREFORE AND LET US SLAY HIM: The Holy One said to them, “You say ‘We shall see’ and I say ‘We shall see’. Indeed we shall see whose words will be fulfilled.”






Israel loved Yosef...R Y'hudah and R Nechemiah. R Y'hudah said: the brightness of features was his, similar to him. (i.e. זקנים is to be seen as a combination of זיו and איקונין) R Nechemiah said: all the halachot Shem and Ever had passed to Ya'akov, he passed to him. And he made for him a k'tonet passim. Resh Lakish, in the name of R Elazar benAzaria said: One should not treat one of his sons differently, for because of the k'tonet passim his father Ya'akov made for Yosef, they hated him. . .. פסים passim, for it reached the palm פס of his hand. Another explanation: for it was exceedingly thin and light and could be hidden in the palm of a hand. פסים, for they cast lots (פיס, post biblical Hebrew) over it for which of them would take it to his father, and selected Y'hudah. פסים on account of the troubles that overtook him: פ Potifar, ס sochrim, "traders," י Yishm'elim, מ Midyanim. Another explanation: פסים, Resh Lakish in the name of R Elazar benAzariah: "Go see the acts of God."(Psalms 66:5) And in the next verse: "He turned sea to dry land."  Why did they hate him? Because the sea would be torn before them.      פסים= "strip of sea" פס ים.
“And when his brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers, they hated him, and could not speak peaceably to him.” [Gen 37:4]  Rabbi Ahva ben Zeira said: From the very disgrace of the tribal ancestors you learn their virtues. Elsewhere it says, “And Avshalom did not speak to Amnon for good or bad,” [Shmuel II 13:22] keeping in his heart what he felt in his heart. Whereas here, “And could not speak peaceably to him” – what was in their heart was on their tongues. 

Chapter 85


What is written above the matter? "And the Midianites sold him to Egypt" [and then it interrupts with the story of Yehuda and Tamar:] "And it was at that time." And the reading (narrative) only required it to [immediately] say "And Yosef was taken down to Egypt" (Genesis 39:1) And because of what was this section made proximate to that? Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Yochanan [answered this]: Rabbi Elazar said, "In order to make one descent proximate to the other descent." Rabbi Yochanan said, "In order to make [one use of the word,] "recognize," proximate to [another use of the word,] "recognize." Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachman said, "In order to make the story of Tamar proximate to the story of Pothiphar's wife; [to tell you that] just as that one (the incident of Tamar) was for the sake of Heaven, so too this one (the incident of Potiphar’s wife) was meant for the sake of Heaven." As Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said, "She saw through her astrology that she was destined to raise a child from him (Yosef), but she did not know if [it would be] from her or from her daughter." This is [the meaning of] what is written (Isaiah 47:13), "let the diviners of months inform you from that which will come to you" - Rabbi Eibo said, "'From that' and not 'all that.'" And similar to it is [the sequence of], "and they were not embarrassed. And the snake was sly"  (Genesis 2:25-3:1). And the reading (narrative) only required it to [immediately] say "And the Lord God made for Adam and his wife, etc." (Genesis 3:21). Rabbi Yehoshua ben Karcha said, "[It is] to let you know from which sin that evildoer (the snake) jumped upon them: from that which he saw them engaging in 'the way of the world,' he desired them." Rabbi Yaakov of Kefar Chanin said, "[It is] to not begin a [separate] section of the snake." And similar to it is [the sequence of], "and the one who walks in pride, He is able to abase (which are the final words of Nevuchadnetsar). Balshatsar the king […] And Daryavesh the Mede” (Daniel 4:34-5:1, 6:1). And where is Ehvil Merodach (who came between Nevuchadnetsar and Balshatsar)? Rabbi Elazar said, "In order to make [one] evildoer proximate to the other, a destroyer to a destroyer, a proud one to a proud one.” Rabbi Shmuel bar Nachman said, "In order to make the interruption of [one] kingdom proximate to the interruption of [another] kingdom." And similar to it is [the sequence of] "And on that very night, Balshatsar the Chaldean king was killed. Daryevesh the Mede" (Daniel 5:30-6:1). [And yet later], "And in the third year of the rulership of Balshatsar the king" (Daniel 8:1). Rav Huna said, "That they not say they are [just] words of poetry; so that they should all know that he wrote it with holy spirit." Our rabbis said, "In order to weave it into the entire book, that he said it with holy spirit." Here too, it should have said, "And Yosef was taken down to Egypt." And it is written, "And Yehuda went down from his brother": He said, "Let us disperse ourselves, [since] the whole time we are together, the contract is found (<i>matsui</i>) for collection." The Holy One, blessed be He, said to them, "Ten men that are found stealing, are they not all caught when one is caught?" And once they were found with the goblet, they said, "The Lord has found (<i>matsa</i>) the sin of your servants." Rabbi Yitschak said, "Like the one that empties out (<i>mematseh</i>) the barrel and leaves it with its sediments." Our rabbis said, "[Yehuda said], 'Let us take care of ourselves; in the past [Yaakov] was required to get us wives to marry, but now that he is involved in his sackcloth and in his fasting, it is not appropriate that he get us wives to marry.' [The brothers] said to Yehuda, 'Are you not our head? Get up and take care of yourself.' Immediately, ‘And it was at that time.'"   
 







'And he said what is the guarantee that I shall give etc.' - Rabbi Hunya said: The Ruach HaKodesh [prophetic spirit] glimmered within her, your seal is Royalty, as it is said (Song of Songs 8, 6): "Set me as a seal upon thy heart". (Jeremiah 22, 24) "As I live, saith the LORD, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon My right hand". "And thy cord", that is the Sanhedrin, who are found in the cord, as it is said (Exodus 39) "A cord of blue". "And thy staff", that is the Messiah, as it is said (Isaiah 11, 1): "And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of Jesse". (Psalms 110, 2) "The rod of Thy strength the LORD will send out of Zion". "And he gave them to her etc". "And she conceived by him", Heroes like so, and Righteous ones like so. "And Judah sent etc." Yehuda Bar Nachman said in the name of Reish Lakish (Proverbs 8, 31): "Playing in His habitable earth" (Proverbs 8, 30) "Playing always before Him", the Torah, that delights his creations. The Holy One Blessed be He said to Judah: You lied to your father, with a goat kid, so too, Tamar lies to you with a goat kid. 

Chapter 86



Chapter 87



Chapter 88



Chapter 89

(Genesis 41:1) "And it was the end of 2 years..." - (Job 28:3) "He sets an end to darkness..." He gave a set time of how many years the world would be in darkness. And what does it mean "he set an end to the darkness"? For so long as the evil inclination is in the world, the world is in (Job 28:3) "darkness and the shadow of death." When the evil inclination is uprooted from the world, no longer will there be "darkness and the shadow of death" in the world. Alternatively: "He sets an end to darkness..." He gave a set time for Joseph of how many years he would be in darkness in prison. Once the end [of that time] arrived, "Pharaoh dreamt a dream..."

Chapter 90



Chapter 91







"And Yosef saw his brothers, etc." - Rabbi Yehoshua bar Nechemiah said, "He made himself a stranger (<i>nocri</i>) to them. "And Yosef  recognized his brothers, etc." - Rabbi Levi and the Rabbis [argued about this]: Rabbi Levi said, "At the time they fell into his hand, 'And Yosef recognized his brothers;' at the time he fell into their hands, 'and they did not recognize him.'" And the Rabbis said, "He who left them adorned by beards, 'And Yosef recognized his brothers - and they did not recognize him,' as they did not leave him adorned by a beard [as he was too young].""And Yosef remembered, etc... and he said to them, etc...'we are all the sons of one man'" - they had a flash of Divine inspiration [in which] they said to him, "We and you are the sons of one man, we are." He said to them, "And where is [the other one]?" "We sold him." He said to them, "For how much did you sell him?" They said to him, "For five <i>sela</i>."He said to them, "And if a person would say to you, 'Give me five <i>sela</i> and I will give him to you,' would you do it?" They said to him, "Yes." "And if a person would say to you, 'Give me double and I will give him to you,' would you do it?"  They said, "Yes." "And if a person would say to you, '[Even] if you would give me a thousand, I will not give him to you,' what would you do?" They said to him, "For that have we come down [to Egypt], whether to kill or to be killed." He said to them, "'This is what I have said about you, spies, etc.'" "Through this will you be examined; by the life of Pharaoh" - when he wanted to make a false oath, he would swear by the life of Pharaoh. Rabbi Levi said, "There is a parable of a goat that ran away from the pasture and went in to a widow. What did she do? She got up and slaughtered it and flayed it and put it in her bed and covered it with a sheet. They came to request it from her. She said, 'So should happen to this woman if she knows about it, this flesh [actually referring to the goat] should be bitten and eaten.' So too, 'by the life of Pharaoh if you will get out, etc...Send one of you.'" "And he placed them in the prison for three days" - never does the Holy One, blessed be He, leave righteous ones in dire straits for three days and so was it taught to Yosef, to Yonah, to Mordechai, to David. And so is it stated (Hoshea 6:2), "He will revive us from the two days; on the third day" of the tribes, "He will bring us up" - "And Yosef said to them on the third day."  

Chapter 92







Here, the money etc. - Rabi Yishmael taught, this is one of the ten a fortiori arguments written in the Torah. 1. "Indeed we returned the silver, obviously we wouldn't steal!"; 2. (Exodus 6) "The Children of Israel did not listen to me, certainly it is doubtful that Pharaoh would!"; 3.(Numbers 12) "And G-d said to Moses, 'If her father would spit in her face [she would hide from sight for seven days] surely then if the Shekhina rebukes her [she should hide for] fourteen days!"; 4. (Deuteronomy 31) "Indeed while I still live among you, you were rebellious, how much more so after my my death!"; 5. (Jeremiah 12) "If you race with the foot-runners and they exhaust you, surely then, you cannot compete with horses!"; 6. (ibid) "If you are secure only in a tranquil land, you will surely not fare well in the jungle of the Jordan!"; 7. (Samuel I 23) "Behold we are afraid even here in Judah, surely [we will fear them] if we go to Keilah!"; 8. (Proverbs 11) "If the righteous pay [for sin] while on earth, certainly the wicked should expect to!"; 9. (Esther 9) "And the king said to Esther, 'In the capitol city the [Jews destroyed so many] imagine what they have done in my other provinces!" [NOTE: The tenth a fortiori argument seems to be: 10. (Ezekiel 15:5) "If the wood of a grapevine has little use when it is whole, it obviously has no value when it is charred!"]
6

Chapter 93



Chapter 94



Chapter 95



Chapter 96



Chapter 97



Chapter 98

1. (Psalms 57:3) "I will call to God on High" - I will call to God on high, on Rosh Hashana, "to the God who completes for me" on Yom Kippur, to know which is for Hashem, and which is for (a harsh) decree. Another explanation: "I will call to God" this is our father Jacob. "to the God who completes for me" because the Holy One, blessed is He, agreed with him, to give to each and every one according to what he is.
2. "And Jacob called to his sons" (Mishlei 16)
3. Gather around and listen, children of Yaakov - ... Eleazar ben Achui said: From this [moment, the children of] Israel merited to say the Shema. In the hour that our father Yaakov was departing from this world, he called his 12 children. He said t them: 'Listen to the God of Israel, that in Heaven is your Father, lest there is in your hearts a dispute/doubt regarding the Holy One of Blessing! They said to him: (Deut. 6:2) 'Listen, Israel,' our father, just as there is no dispute/doubt in your heart regarding the Holy One of Blessing, there is no dispute/doubt in our hearts, rather, 'Hashem is our God, Hashem is One.' And even he said softly: 'Blessed be the Name of the Glory of His kingdom forever.' Rabbi Berachia and Rabi Chelbo in the name of Rabi Shmuel - this is why [all of] Israel gets up and goes to sleep every day, saying: 'Listen Israel' - our father, in the Cave of Machpela, that what you commanded us it is still done by us - 'Hashem is our God, Hashem Alone.'

Chapter 99



Chapter 100








“…and he made for his father a mourning of seven days.” (Genesis 50:10) Why do we mourn for seven days? In parallel to the seven days of feasting. The Holy One said to them: in this world you shared the pain of this righteous one and mourned for him seven days,  in the coming world I will transform that mourning to joy, as it says “…and I will turn their mourning into joy and will comfort them and make them rejoice from their sorrow.” (Jeremiah 31:12) And just as I console you, so I will console Zion and all her waste places in the manner that it says,” For the Lord shall console Zion, He shall console all its ruins, and He shall make its desert like a paradise and its wasteland like the garden of the Lord; joy and happiness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and a voice of song.” (Isaiah 51:3)




“…and he made for his father a mourning of seven days.” (Bereshit 50:10) Why do we mourn for seven days in parallel to the seven days of feasting? The Holy One said to them: in this world you shared the pain of this righteous one and mourned for him seven days,  in the coming world I will transform that mourning to joy, as it says “…and I will turn their mourning into joy and will comfort them and make them rejoice from their sorrow.” (Yirmiyahu 31:12) And just as I console you, so I will console Zion and all her waste places in the manner that it says,” For the Lord shall console Zion, He shall console all its ruins, and He shall make its desert like a paradise and its wasteland like the garden of the Lord; joy and happiness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and a voice of song.” (Yeshayahu 51:3)