Tosefta Sukkah
תוספתא סוכה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Sukkah



Chapter 1

A sukkah which is more than twenty amot high is invalid; R. Yehudah, considers it kosher. R. Yehudah said, It once happened that the sukkah of Helen (in Lod) was higher than twenty amot, and the elders were going in and out of it, and no one said anything to her. [The sages] said to him, It was because she was a woman, and a woman is not obligated [to dwell] in a sukkah. He said to them, And did she not have seven sons who were scholars, and all were sleeping in the sukkah?
A sukkah where the sunshine is more than the shade is not valid. This applies only from above; but from the sides, even if they were wholly exposed to the sun, it is kosher. If one puts [schach] covering over the sides of a bed or the sides of a tree which are ten handbreadths high, if the part exposed to the sun be greater than that of the shade, it is kosher; but if not, it is invalid. The sukkah of shepherds, the sukkah of fruit-pickers, and a stolen sukkah, are invalid. 
If one puts a [schach] covering of ropes, or with bundles of sheaves, it is kosher; a covering of flax in its natural state is kosher; a covering of soaked flax is invalid, with reeds and with forked reeds, even if they are stuck together, it is kosher. A covering of ears of grain, if the husk is more than the grain, it is kosher; if not, it is invalid. R. Yosi bar R. Yehudah says: A covering of torn pieces of garments, it is kosher. 
They can be covered with planed boards, these are the words of R. Yehudah; the sages say: they are prohibited unless there is sufficient space between them. R. Yehudah says: It once happened that at the time of [religious] danger they set up ladders, covered them with boards, and slept under them. They said to him: A time of danger is no proof [for a normal case]. But all agree that even if the boards be four handbreadths wide there must be between them sufficient space. One who hangs on it (Persian) nuts, pomegranates, olives, or bunches of grapes, or wreathes of grain, it is kosher. One may not eat from them except on the last day of the festival. If he made a condition on them that he would eat from them on the festival, it is permitted.
If a large courtyard is encircled by pillars, the pillars are considered like sides. A man can even make his friend a side in order to eat and drink. Not only that, but he can set up his bed there, and spread over it a sheet so that the sun should not fall on those who are eating nor on the dead. The sages agree to R. Eliezer that tents may not be started to be made on the festival, and of course [the same] on the Sabbath. How do they differ? Only with reference to adding [to a tent], for R. Eliezer says, One may not add on the festival, and of course [the same] on the Sabbath; whereas the sages say, One may add on the Sabbath, and of course [the same] on the festival. It once happened to R. Eliezer that he was dining in the sukkah of R. Yochanan b. Elazar in Cesarea when the sun approached. He said to him,What [is the law] regarding spreading a sheet over [the sukkah]? He said, There is not a tribe in Israel which has not given rise to a judge. 1 The sun reached to half the booth. [R. Elieser repeated his question.] He answered, There is not a tribe which has appointed a judge [and we therefore must defer to them]; the tribes of Yehudah and Binyamin appointed kings by word of prophets. The sun reached the feet of R. Eliezer, he took a sheet and spread it over the sukkah. R. Eliezer bundled up his garments, and went out.
One who makes his sukkah in the shape of a cone, or leans it against a wall, it is not valid. But R. Eliezer agrees that if it be placed on a roof with a space of a handbreadth s width, or if it be higher than the ground by a handbreadth, it is kosher. 
Matting made of shavings or of large reed-grass can be used as a covering, but if it is small they cannot cover with it. Reed mats or rush mats, if large, may be used as a covering, but not they are woven toegther. But R. Yishmael b. R. Yosi said in the name of his father that even if woven together they may be used; and so R. Dosa says, following his opinion.
One who puts a [schach] covering over a wagon that is higher than 10: Rabbi Yosi b. Rabbi Yehudah says in the name of Rabbi Yosi, One who sleeps under [that] wagon is like one who sleeps under the bed.
One who puts up four beams, and covers them over [with schach], R. Yaakov says, They should be seen whether, were they divided, each post would reach a span on each side; if so, it is kosher; if not, it is invalid. And the sages say: Two legal walls; and the third wall [need only be] one handbreadth. R. Shimon says: Three legal [walls], and a fourth [need only be] one handbreadth. R. Shimon b. Elazar says in the name of R. Meir: If two are man-made and one by a tree, the sukkah is kosher and they may enter it on the festival.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3







As for the sacrificial waters one is held guilty on account of <i>piggul</i>, or of <i>nothar</i>, or of uncleanness. Therefore if they have become unfit or unclean they are taken to the house of burning ; but in the cases of the bottle and flask themselves one is guilty of transgression, since the things themselves are holy. Rabbi Akiba said, the Torah says, Bring an omer of barley at Passover, for it is the season of the barley crop, that the increase may be blessed to thee. Bring wheat as an offering of first-fruits at Shavuos, for it is the season of the wheat harvest, that the fruits of the tree may be blessed to thee. Pour out water at Sukkot, for it is the rainy season, that the rains may be blessed to thee, for it is said, And it shall be, that Those of all the families of the earth that do not go up unto Jerusalem to worship the King, Lord of hosts, upon them there shall be no rain. And if the family of Egypt go not up, neither shall it be upon them. [Zachariah 14]