Tiferet Yisrael
תפארת ישראל
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Tiferet_Yisrael
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Tiferet Yisrael

Introduction to Tiferet Yisrael







Chapter 1










The natural world was created in the seven days of creation – corresponding with the seven natural days are the seventy nations – for each day 10. There is one nation which is above nature and that corresponds to the eighth which is above nature

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7








...And know more, because the seed that is sown in the ground, it brings forth trees, fruit, leaves and branches. The leaves and the fruit have a special form, which is fitting to the seed according to its unique nature  And don't say that if he had taken out the branches and the top in another way, that it would have been bad, just because that's how the nature of the seed was decreed. And in this form, this root came emerged from this root as the perfect creation, and it is intact as it leads to the fruit and leaves , as befits the nature of the seed   just as the soul itself, which is from above, is righteous and pure, and is given in the human body to below. And it is necessary that he bring it out to the potential, just as the seed brings out the potential from the soil in which it was sown. And it goes out to God to act according to what is appropriate for the soul

Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31


The explanation is that it is because the word that came out from God, may He be blessed, divided into seventy. Since that is the way of something that goes out from God, may He be blessed, in this world - that it divides into seventy, just like there are seventy nations and there are seventy languages. And hence the utterance and the language that came out from God, He be blessed, divided into seventy. And we have explained this in another place - that it is only possible like this: That that which comes out from God, who is singular, is necessarily multiple. This is the opposite of that which the philosophers say, that the many not come from the singular, and that is why they would arrive at many errors. Rather multiplicity comes from the singular God, may He be blessed, when the many are similar to the one. For if seven had come from Him, that thing would surely have been complete multiplicity [which is unrelated to God]. It is as it is written (see Deuteronomy 28:7), "by one road will they approach [you], but by seven roads they will flee." That is to say they approached on one road, but they will flee by many roads. But the number seventy, which is a group number, is a multiplicity that is united. This is because group numbers unite, which is not the case with singular digits. And hence he said that each and every utterance that came out from God, may He be blessed, would divide into a multiplicity of seventy, which is a multiplicity that is united. And we wrote at length about this thing elsewhere, but here is not its place. The principle of the thing is that it was divided into seventy languages, since that is fitting for speech that comes from Him, may He be blessed; especially when He was coming to give the Torah to Israel - which is an exalted level, since the speech was divided into seventy. And these things are clear.

Chapter 32




One can also say that for this he held the mountain over them as a barrel, that Israel would not say, G-d forbid, that there would be an annulment of Kabbalat haTorah, because they of their own volition received the Torah and could thereby have been exempted from it. Thus G-d held the mountain over their heads like a barrel, that they would be forced to receive it. All things that are forced and necessary cannot be removed or annulled.
This is proved in the Midrash wrt the verse “and she will be his wife; he cannot send her away all the days of his life.” When the Holy One came to give the Torah on Mount Sinai, he held the mountain over them like a barrel, that they would receive it. And because of this, Israel is the anusato of the Holy One, and about the anusato it is written “and she will be his wife; he cannot send her away all the days of his life.” And this is not true with respect to the seducer [who does not force himself on anyone]. The punishment of the rapist is in accordance with his act, because the rapist forced himself on the virgin and everything that is forced is essential, thus he cannot send her away since he himself forces the marital relations, he cannot ever leave. Therefore, G-d held the mountain over them like a barrel so that the connection would be essential, and every essential connection cannot be abandoned, as in the case of the rapist.

Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43


Before we clarify this matter, it is appropriate for you to know the distinction which exists between the repetition of the Torah (Deuteronomy), where the second set of Ten Commandments are found, and the rest of the Torah. In the gemara Megillah 31b it says “…one may not interrupt the reading of the curses…Abaye said: They taught this only with regard to the curses that are in Leviticus, but with regard to the curses that are in Deuteronomy, one may interrupt. What is the reason for this distinction? These curses in Leviticus are stated in the plural, and Moses pronounced them from the mouth of the Almighty. However, these curses in Deuteronomy are stated in the singular, and Moses said them on his own.” This does not mean that, Gd forbid, Moshe said even one letter on his own. Rather it refers to the distinction between Deuteronomy and the rest of the Torah, because the Torah which God gave to Israel has two aspects – one from the perspective of God who gave the Torah and the second from the perspective of Israel who received it. If one gave something to a friend who was of equal status, then there is only one perspective because they are equals, but when God who is above all gave the Torah to Israel on earth it is impossible that there not be a special aspect to it which pertains to the giver and another which pertains to the receiver. It is fit that the rest of the Torah express the aspect of the giver while the last book of Deuteronomy express that of the receiver because one who receives does so at the end once the giver has completed their words. This is why Deuteronomy is called Mishne Torah (the repetition of the Torah) to indicate that it contains some special aspect from the perspective of the receiver, as it says “…Moses undertook to expound this Teaching…” (Deut. 1:5) This is because the one who receives needs more clarification and explanation, and this is the distinction between Deuteronomy and the rest of the Torah. In the rest of the Torah, even though Moshe spoke every word nevertheless it was as if God said that ‘thus was decreed and so commanded the Lord,’ God placed the words in Moshe’s mouth as it is written regarding the Ten Commandments “…As Moses spoke, God answered him in thunder.” (Exodus 19:19) Thus it was with everything that Moshe said – God put the words in his mouth. Deuteronomy is different, because in this book Moshe spoke his own words as a messenger who has been commanded to deliver a message. This is what the gemara means when it said ‘these curses in Deuteronomy are stated in the singular, and Moses said them on his own,’ God did not place the words in his mouth because the Deuteronomy is the receiving of the Torah and the act of receiving happens through one who is close to the receiver. The receiver is the essential element of Deuteronomy and therefore it was spoken by Moshe who was close to the receiver (i.e. Israel). The general principal is that God gave the Torah and Israel received it, and that receiving always happens at the end which is Deuteronomy. This is why the language of the book is fit to the receiver, because in it the receiver is primary – meaning that Deuteronomy came at the end to clarify the Divine message further in a manner fit to the receiver. This is a great and essential principal which answers all the difficulties posed by the differences and deviations between the first and second descriptions of the Ten Commandments. Furthermore you must know that the Torah is a covenant between God who gave it and Israel who received the covenant. A covenant binds together the one who makes the covenant with the one who receives it, and anything which connects two things from one perspective is close to one side and from another to the other. Therefore the Torah, which is the covenant between God and Israel, is from one perspective closer to God who gave the covenant and from another perspective to Israel who received it. Thus all of the Torah except Deuteronomy was spoken directly by God who made the covenant but Deuteronomy which comes at the end, which is so to speak the other extremity, is closer to Israel the receiver…