Tiferet Yisrael
תפארת ישראל
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tiferet Yisrael

Introduction to Tiferet Yisrael







Chapter 1










The natural world was created in the seven days of creation – corresponding with the seven natural days are the seventy nations – for each day 10. There is one nation which is above nature and that corresponds to the eighth which is above nature

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

(1) There are some people--and they are people of deep hearts--who walks in the ways of the philosophers, investigating all things with their minds and intellects. It is very astonishing in their eyes, regarding the commandments pertaining to deeds, that a person should merit eternal success in the separate world by means of any commandment that is physical. They say, what help can a physical deed give the the soul as a means to acquire eternal life in the separate world, in a place where there are no physical deeds? And more than this, they are astonished; for if all the commandments were good qualities in the human soul, such as the commandments of charity (Deuteronomy 15:8), and the commandment "you shall not hate your brother in your heart" (Leviticus 19:17) and "you shall not stand idly by your neighbor's blood" (ibid. 19:16), and similar instances of good character traits, which are good qualities in the soul of the doer, it would be possible to say that after all a person may acquire good qualities by means of them and distance himself from evil. And it is said the the LORD--may He be blest--gives a good reward to whomever good is found in, and pays back evil to the evildoer. But the commandments of not wearing wool with linen (Leviticus 19:19) and forbidden combinations of seeds (ibid.) and the commandment of slaughter from the neck and not from the nape, and pinching the head off from the nape and not the neck in the temple (Chullin 19b)--if it is bad deed to do it from the nape, why is slaughter from the neck forbidden in the temple (ibid.)? And if doing it from the neck is good, if so why is its opposite found in the temple? Lo, they have found many ways to give a reason and explanation with their intellect, which is far from the ways of the Torah and from the ways of the sages. Only to those who know the Torah have the hidden things of wisdom and truth been revealed.
(2) And although it would be proper not to reply to their question at all, for as to this matter, the fact that they want to give a compelling reason in all matters--if we saw that they gave us a reason for all the very few natural matters, it would be incumbent upon us to pay attention to their question. And although there is a difference as the heavens are high above the earth, for natural things are on earth, while the Torah cannot even be found in heaven, but only from the highest world--nonetheless, it would be incumbent upon is to pay attention to the question.
(3) But things are not so. For the natural things, such as animals, and even plants, do not present us with explanations and reasons. For how can it occur to anyone that they can give a sufficient explanation for every animal, the number of its tissues and organs, for each and its unique form an explanation, and for all the plants. And do not look towards the doctors and the naturalists, for if they have given an explanation, it is for one case in a thousand, and even when they have given one, it is not clear that it is true, as is known to anyone who studies their words. and if this is the case concerning natural things, all the more so is it the case concerning divine things, namely the divine commandments which a person is obligated to do--why should he do this actions and not do a different action? Just as we do not understand his body and form, which are his existence in this world--we do not know his perfection. And if he were not created with this from, he would not have his bodily life and perfection, so that he is brought to be. All the more so regarding the divine activities that bring a person to eternal life, it is no wonder if we don't know in what way they are and why they are in that way. And lo, this was not the question of the sages that we are obligated to answer, if it were not that they were giving us answers concerning natural things concerning humans and plants, but that is not found to be the case. But we will not ignore the ways of the sages who know the Torah, and in this way you will stand upon the way of the Torah.
(4) In the chapter that beings "one does not stand" (Berakhot 33b), the Mishna says: "the one who says [in prayer] 'may your mercies arrive upon the bird's nest,' [because God commanded us to send away the mother bird before taking her eggs] or 'may your name be mentioned for the good,' or 'we give thanks, we give thanks,' is to be silenced." And it says in the Gemara (ibid.), "well and good as far as 'we give thanks, we give thanks' is concerned--it seems like [the one saying praying believes in] two authorities, and likewise 'many your name be mentioned for the good,' which suggests [giving thanks] for the good and not for the bad, but a Mishna says (Berakhot 54a) 'a person must bless for the bad as he blesses for the good.' But what is the reason for [silencing the one who says] 'may your mercies arrive upon the bird's nest'? Two Amoraim in the west disagreed about this, Rabbi Yochanan son of Avin, and Rabbi Yosi son of Zevida. One says, because he introduces jealousy into creation, and one says, because he makes God's traits mercies when they are nothing other than decrees." The explanation of this matter is that one should not say "may your mercies arrive upon the bird's nest" because it makes it sound as if the LORD-may He be blest--commanded this commandment because He has mercy on the bird's nest, and thereby makes a distinction and differentiation between the things that exist, so that the world is not one. For why should He have mercy on the bird's next and not upon other species? For surely if they are decrees that He thus decreed in His wisdom, then that is not a difficulty, because such is the decree that He decreed specifically about this, and not about another. Just as the species are distinguished in themselves, for one species is thus, and another species is otherwise, so too one can say that this commandment applies to this species, and that commandment applies to another. But as to the trait of mercy, all His creatures are alike worthy of mercy, and if so why did He have mercy specifically on this one? This would be a differentiation and distinction among the species, for there is a word about this species from the LORD--may He be blest--which is not the case of other species. 






However from the words of the sages, it appears that it should not be said that the commandments that God, may He be blessed, gave are for the sake of the recipient, which is man. Rather, they are decrees from God's side, may He be blessed, who makes His decrees upon His people, like a [human] king who makes decrees upon his people. Even though it is true that good [for him] follows from this, which is beyond any benefit, from the angle of his keeping the decrees that He decreed upon him; nevertheless, the genesis of the decree that He gave is not for the good of the recipient. And [about] that which it is written, <i>Then the Lord commanded us to observe all these laws [...] for our good</i> (Deuteronomy 6:24), the understanding is not that He, may He be blessed, commanded the commandments to do good to us. As this is not so. Rather, He, may He be blessed, commanded us like a king who makes decrees. It is just that this decree is <i>for our good, to keep us alive like today</i>, if we observe the commandments. But it is not that the genesis of the commandment is for our good. And [about] that which it said (Makkot 23a), "The Holy One, blessed be He, wanted to give merit to the Jewish people, hence he multiplied the Torah and the commandments for them, etc.," its explanation is because there are many decrees; as a result, there is much reward. And this thing is agreed upon in the Gemara in several places, and it is a central root principle in the Gemara, upon which many laws are built: Such that in many places, they said, "the commandments were not given for benefit." but rather they were given in order to be decrees. And hence they said (Rosh Hashanaah 28a) [that] one who vows not to benefit from a shofar is permitted to blow it, and one who vows not to give benefit to his fellow may blow for him; one who vows not to benefit from a spring may immerse when the immersion is a commandment. And there are many [statements] like these in the Gemara. And the reason for all of them is because the commandments of the Torah were not given for benefit, but rather as a yoke for a person. And do not say that its explanation is that it is not to give benefit in this world, but rather for our good in the world to come. As if the genesis of the giving of the commandments were for the Jewish people, for our good in the world to come; if so, the commandments would be given for benefit. And if the matter were like Ramban, may his memory be blessed, explained (Ramban on Deuteronomy 22:6), that the genesis of the commandment was for our good; if so, this law would not be like this, that it would be permissible to blow a commanded sound for him when he is vowed not to give him benefit. Rather, it is certain that the commandment is upon us like [that of] a king who makes a decree upon his people, and as we explained. And that is why it said that all these are permitted.

Chapter 7








...And know more, because the seed that is sown in the ground, it brings forth trees, fruit, leaves and branches. The leaves and the fruit have a special form, which is fitting to the seed according to its unique nature  And don't say that if he had taken out the branches and the top in another way, that it would have been bad, just because that's how the nature of the seed was decreed. And in this form, this root came emerged from this root as the perfect creation, and it is intact as it leads to the fruit and leaves , as befits the nature of the seed   just as the soul itself, which is from above, is righteous and pure, and is given in the human body to below. And it is necessary that he bring it out to the potential, just as the seed brings out the potential from the soil in which it was sown. And it goes out to God to act according to what is appropriate for the soul

Chapter 8







And it has been explained to you, clarifying that which (Rabbi Yochanan) said, that it is not the dead that render impure nor the heifer that purifies. It is to say, that it is not a natural thing for the purifying waters to purify. Rather, it is only God, may He be blessed, who determined and ordered man's actions according to that which is necessitated by the Intellect, that this is what he should take for his purification. Yet it is not a natural thing, but is rather all divine Intellect. But for man, it is an ordinance and a decree when he is not able to understand the reason for the commandment which is divine Intellect. And so, too, are all of the commandments — which are divine Intellect, and not human intellect. Therefore, a man who has a divine soul, which yet exists within physicality, clings to Him, may He be blessed, through the commandments of the divine Intellect, when he clings to them and does them, and they take his soul beyond nature. And even if he did not know the reason for the commandment, is it not that when he does the commandment and clings to the commandment, which is the divine intellect, that he is clinging to Him, may He be blessed? And understand these things. And this is enough about this.

Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31


The explanation is that it is because the word that came out from God, may He be blessed, divided into seventy. Since that is the way of something that goes out from God, may He be blessed, in this world - that it divides into seventy, just like there are seventy nations and there are seventy languages. And hence the utterance and the language that came out from God, He be blessed, divided into seventy. And we have explained this in another place - that it is only possible like this: That that which comes out from God, who is singular, is necessarily multiple. This is the opposite of that which the philosophers say, that the many not come from the singular, and that is why they would arrive at many errors. Rather multiplicity comes from the singular God, may He be blessed, when the many are similar to the one. For if seven had come from Him, that thing would surely have been complete multiplicity [which is unrelated to God]. It is as it is written (see Deuteronomy 28:7), "by one road will they approach [you], but by seven roads they will flee." That is to say they approached on one road, but they will flee by many roads. But the number seventy, which is a group number, is a multiplicity that is united. This is because group numbers unite, which is not the case with singular digits. And hence he said that each and every utterance that came out from God, may He be blessed, would divide into a multiplicity of seventy, which is a multiplicity that is united. And we wrote at length about this thing elsewhere, but here is not its place. The principle of the thing is that it was divided into seventy languages, since that is fitting for speech that comes from Him, may He be blessed; especially when He was coming to give the Torah to Israel - which is an exalted level, since the speech was divided into seventy. And these things are clear.

Chapter 32




One can also say that for this he held the mountain over them as a barrel, that Israel would not say, G-d forbid, that there would be an annulment of Kabbalat haTorah, because they of their own volition received the Torah and could thereby have been exempted from it. Thus G-d held the mountain over their heads like a barrel, that they would be forced to receive it. All things that are forced and necessary cannot be removed or annulled.
This is proved in the Midrash wrt the verse “and she will be his wife; he cannot send her away all the days of his life.” When the Holy One came to give the Torah on Mount Sinai, he held the mountain over them like a barrel, that they would receive it. And because of this, Israel is the anusato of the Holy One, and about the anusato it is written “and she will be his wife; he cannot send her away all the days of his life.” And this is not true with respect to the seducer [who does not force himself on anyone]. The punishment of the rapist is in accordance with his act, because the rapist forced himself on the virgin and everything that is forced is essential, thus he cannot send her away since he himself forces the marital relations, he cannot ever leave. Therefore, G-d held the mountain over them like a barrel so that the connection would be essential, and every essential connection cannot be abandoned, as in the case of the rapist.

Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43


Before we clarify this matter, it is appropriate for you to know the distinction which exists between the repetition of the Torah (Deuteronomy), where the second set of Ten Commandments are found, and the rest of the Torah. In the gemara Megillah 31b it says “…one may not interrupt the reading of the curses…Abaye said: They taught this only with regard to the curses that are in Leviticus, but with regard to the curses that are in Deuteronomy, one may interrupt. What is the reason for this distinction? These curses in Leviticus are stated in the plural, and Moses pronounced them from the mouth of the Almighty. However, these curses in Deuteronomy are stated in the singular, and Moses said them on his own.” This does not mean that, Gd forbid, Moshe said even one letter on his own. Rather it refers to the distinction between Deuteronomy and the rest of the Torah, because the Torah which God gave to Israel has two aspects – one from the perspective of God who gave the Torah and the second from the perspective of Israel who received it. If one gave something to a friend who was of equal status, then there is only one perspective because they are equals, but when God who is above all gave the Torah to Israel on earth it is impossible that there not be a special aspect to it which pertains to the giver and another which pertains to the receiver. It is fit that the rest of the Torah express the aspect of the giver while the last book of Deuteronomy express that of the receiver because one who receives does so at the end once the giver has completed their words. This is why Deuteronomy is called Mishne Torah (the repetition of the Torah) to indicate that it contains some special aspect from the perspective of the receiver, as it says “…Moses undertook to expound this Teaching…” (Deut. 1:5) This is because the one who receives needs more clarification and explanation, and this is the distinction between Deuteronomy and the rest of the Torah. In the rest of the Torah, even though Moshe spoke every word nevertheless it was as if God said that ‘thus was decreed and so commanded the Lord,’ God placed the words in Moshe’s mouth as it is written regarding the Ten Commandments “…As Moses spoke, God answered him in thunder.” (Exodus 19:19) Thus it was with everything that Moshe said – God put the words in his mouth. Deuteronomy is different, because in this book Moshe spoke his own words as a messenger who has been commanded to deliver a message. This is what the gemara means when it said ‘these curses in Deuteronomy are stated in the singular, and Moses said them on his own,’ God did not place the words in his mouth because the Deuteronomy is the receiving of the Torah and the act of receiving happens through one who is close to the receiver. The receiver is the essential element of Deuteronomy and therefore it was spoken by Moshe who was close to the receiver (i.e. Israel). The general principal is that God gave the Torah and Israel received it, and that receiving always happens at the end which is Deuteronomy. This is why the language of the book is fit to the receiver, because in it the receiver is primary – meaning that Deuteronomy came at the end to clarify the Divine message further in a manner fit to the receiver. This is a great and essential principal which answers all the difficulties posed by the differences and deviations between the first and second descriptions of the Ten Commandments. Furthermore you must know that the Torah is a covenant between God who gave it and Israel who received the covenant. A covenant binds together the one who makes the covenant with the one who receives it, and anything which connects two things from one perspective is close to one side and from another to the other. Therefore the Torah, which is the covenant between God and Israel, is from one perspective closer to God who gave the covenant and from another perspective to Israel who received it. Thus all of the Torah except Deuteronomy was spoken directly by God who made the covenant but Deuteronomy which comes at the end, which is so to speak the other extremity, is closer to Israel the receiver…