Ramban on Sefer Yetzirah
רמב"ן על ספר יצירה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ramban on Sefer Yetzirah



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

In thirty-two... Explanation: In the two letters, Ain Sof (the Infinite), there is the essence of endlessness, for in the power of Ain Sof exists the supreme elevation, from which emanates the emanation of wisdom. From wisdom, thirty-two hidden paths are derived. Since they are drawn from wisdom in the supreme elevation of Ain Sof, they are called "wonders," from the term "כי יפלא" (ki yiphlah), meaning "it will wonder," as we translate, "ארי יתכסי" (ari yitkassei). And because there is a difference between one path and another, they are also called wonders, which comes from the term "כי יפליא" (ki yiphli), meaning "it will wonderfully differ," derived from the word "הפרשה" (haparshah), meaning "distinction." And each path will draw from wisdom until it reaches to show every path and path in understanding, as it is stated. "And the extension of wisdom is from pearls."
"Engraving"... The power of the ascent of ascents is endless, from which comes the supreme crown of elevation. Wisdom engraves and creates the power of cause, which is called Yud Hei (יו"ד ה"א), which is in the power of existence. And from the power of understanding, He created all the structure, which is called Da'at (דעת).
"In three books." In the three names that are called by its essence of the name, as they are all included in it.
"In a book and recounting." Three letters of the name Yud Hei Vav (יו"ד ה"א וא"ו), in which everything is included in it until endlessness, singled out from the emanations of the Creator, who is Ain Sof. And it hints to all three because through it, the Lord, who is the foundation of the worlds, in Yud Hei (י"ה), thirty-two, when the two letters of Yud Hei (י"ה) are reversed, [meaning "י"פ ה' ה"פ י' and two letters Yud Hei (י"ה)].

Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5



Mishnah 6



Mishnah 7



Mishnah 8



Mishnah 9



Mishnah 10



Mishnah 11



Mishnah 12



Mishnah 13

