Rav Hirsch on Torah
רש"ר הירש על התורה
The Pentateuch - Translation by Isaac Levy
The Pentateuch

Rav Hirsch on Torah

Introduction



Genesis



Chapter 1



Paragraph 1



Paragraph 2



Paragraph 3



Paragraph 4



Paragraph 5

ויקרא, and God called the light: “Day!” and the darkness he called: “Night!” This can not simply mean He gave the name, for the words light and day are by no means identical, but day is the measure of time in which light rules over the earth, and similarly darkness and night. Apart from day and night, the earth, the sea, and heaven we do not find the Creator “calling” anything by name — even Man, of whom it does not say: He formed a creature and called it Adam. In any case where God does call something by a name it always expresses a mission, a calling for the one to be so called, as Abraham, Israel etc. It is accordingly here to be taken in the pertinent sense of our sages who say: קרײא רחמנא לנהורה ופקדיה אמצוותא דיממא קרײא רחמנא לחשכה ופקדיה אמצוותא דלילא (Pesachim 2). “God called the light and appointed it to the tasks of the day, and God called to the darkness and appointed it to the tasks of the night.” He directed both to their separate provinces. Light to day, יום related to קום, standing up, where everything arises to its own independence (יבם is also related, the one who is called upon להקים שם לאחיו) the time of being erect; darkness to night; לילה, root לול from which we get לולאות dragging along, the time when everything sinks down and the whole word is lying down, and no longer stands there in its own separate outline. The commencement of each of these times is בקר and ערב, ערב: where the two conditions begin to mix, and בקר related to פקר, בגר, בכר, to be free, independent, where things separated from each other and appear in their own outline, and it is already possibly לבקר to distinguish one from the other. But it says ויהי ערב ויהי בקר יום אחד. The complete day beginning with the בקר developing towards completion by the influence of light is the goal, is the טוב which is the purpose of the Creator, to which night, beginning with the ערב and achieving its completion by the influence of darkness, is but the preparation, and only when a בקר has succeeded an ערב has the world passed a day of complete existence.
It is significant that here it does not put the וירא ה’ כי טוב just before the end of the sentence — as it does in the following creations — but places וירא ה’ את האור כי טוב immediately after the creation of the light before the הבדלה. It is not the הבדלה but the אור, the light and all the organic life and growth through the light which is designated as the טוב, as the real positive aim of the creation. As such, we should have expected the light to have overcome the darkness, to have entirely done away with the old condition of darkness, and a Kingdom of entire light and life to have begun on earth. And in fact such a condition of entire light and life on earth is promised by the mouth of the prophets as the final goal of the development of the world. A condition where, as Is. in 30:26 says: “the light of the moon will be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun twice sevenfold that of the light of the seven days” (of the creation!), where (ibid. 25:8) “God will do away with death for ever and will wipe away tears from every face” where, accordingly, darkness and weariness and death will have disappeared. As God placed light there as the טוב He furnished it with the power to completely overcome the darkness, and it would have immediately done away with the darkness had not that Kingdom of light on earth presupposed a state of moral perfection in humanity which only beckons to us as the crowning point at the end of the centuries, were it not necessary for us, until that time, always again and again to rejuvenate ourselves in the lap of Night for the life of the light. It was for that that God intervened between the light and the darkness and directed the darkness, for the present, still to keep its reign of night with its ever fresh resowing the seeds of life. It was probably with an eye to this position of the כי טוב at the creation of light that our sages made the saying so pregnant with meaning: שגנזו לצריקים לעתיד לבא (Chagiga 12a.).

Exodus



Leviticus



Numbers



Deuteronomy

