The Book of Maccabees I
ספר מקבים א
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/The_Book_of_Maccabees_I
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org



The Book of Maccabees I

Perek 1

And it was, after Alexander the King of Macedonia smote Darius the King of Persia, and ruled in his place--
This being Alexander, the son of Phillip, who exited from the land of the Kittim, and ruled over Greece originally,
And he fought additionally many wars, and he captured walled cities, and smote the kings of the land by sword,
And he went on his way, traveling until the ends of the earth, and he took the spoils of many nations, --
And it was when all the lands were conquered before him, and his heart became very haughty.
He gathered a large army, and he ruled over many countries in their lands by their nations, and they were to him a tax of workers.
And it was after all these things, he fell into bed-rest and became ill.
And he saw that his days came near to death, and so he called to all his officers who grew up with him from his youth, and he divided among them his kingdom while he was still alive.
And Alexander reigned for twelve years and some days.
And it was after his death that his officers inherited all his territories, and each man captured his land.
And they placed a crown of kingship on their heads, and they ruled, they and their offspring after them, for many days, and meanwhile the evil ones strengthened very much.
From them went out a evil root, who was Antiochus the Splendid, the son of Antiochus, who had been a hostage in Rome.
And the beginning of his rule was in the 137th year of the reign of Greece. 
At that time some wicked men from Israel went out, leading Israel astray, saying: 
Let us make a covenant with the other nations around us, for since we have separated from them, many terrible troubles have found us. 
And this found favor in the eyes of the people, and they sent messengers to the king. And the king commanded them to follow the ways and laws of the nations. 
And they established party halls in Jerusalem according to the custom of the nations, and they did not circumcise their sons, and they abandoned the holy covenant to go in their ways, and they sold themselves to be wicked in the eyes of Hashem.
And it was when Antiochus sat securely on his throne, and he raised his heart to conquer the land of Egypt and to rule over the two kingdoms.
And he rose up and he went to the land of Egypt, and he took his people with him, and he had chariots and cavalry and elephants and ships, a very strong camp. 
And he fought Ptolemy the king of Egypt. And Ptolemy feared him and he fled, and the people fell, slaughtered exceedingly.
And he captured every fortified city in Egypt, and he looted very much plunder.
And it happened after he returned from smiting Egypt, in the one hundred and forty-third year [of the Greek kingdom], and he rose up against Israel to wage war, and he came with a great and mighty army to Jerusalem.

































A