Bartenura on Mishnah Menachot
ברטנורא על משנה מנחות
Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2020
http://sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Menachot



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

כל המנחות שנקמצו שלא לשמן – as for example, that he vowed a free-will offering of a meal-offering in a deep and covered pan and the Kohen took a fistful of he meal-offering for the sake of a pan [without a covered lid – which is fried on a flat pan] (and what is baked in it is a thick mass, which is different than that of a deep and covered pan deep-fried in oil (see Tractate Menahot 5:8).
כשרות – and he offers the incense of the fistful [of the meal-offering] and its residue is consumed [by the Kohanim]. For the fistful of the meal-offering stands in place of the ritual slaughter of the sacrifice. And just as regarding all of the animal offerings that were slaughtered not for their own sake are kosher/fit, as we derive from a Biblical verse at the beginning of Tractate Zevakhim (i.e., see Deuteronomy 23:24), here also, all the meal-offerings that are fistfuls which were gathered not for their own sakes are kosher/fit.
אלא שלא עלו לבעלים לשם חובה – It should have taught: “that it does not go to the owner’s credit for the fulfillment of an obligation/שלא עלו לבעלים לשם חובה “ (which is how it is phrased at the beginning of Tractate Zevakhim), but that it teaches here]: אלא" /but” – that implies that all of their laws are like kosher meal-offerings but for this thing, to teach us that it is prohibited to teach regarding it another change, that if he transgressed and took a fistful of it that was not for its sake, it is prohibited to give that fistful in sacred vessels that is not for its own sake.
שלא עלו לבעלים לשם חובתו – and he did not fulfill his vow and he has to bring another meal-offering for the sake of the deep and covered pan.
חוץ ממנחת חוטא – as for example, a meal-offering that comes on one’s ritual defilement from the Holy of Holies, if he could not afford two turtle-doves.
ומנחת קנאות – of the Sotah/the woman accused of infidelity by her husband. For if they took fistfuls that were not for their sake, as for example, for the purpose of a free-will offering, or he gave the handful in sacred vessels that were not for this purpose, or he walked or offered incense not for its sake/name, or he had in mind one of these forms of Divine Service: “I am serving for their sakes/name or not for their sakes/name.” These meal-offerings are invalid and their residues/remnants are not consumed. And the reason is because the All-Merciful calls the sin’s meal offering a sin-offering, and regarding a sin-offering, it is written (Leviticus 4:33): “[He shall lay his hand upon the head of the purification offering,] and it shall be slaughtered as a purification offering (i.e., sin-offering)/ושחט אותה לחטאת [at the spot where the burnt offering is slaughter],” (Leviticus 4:34): “and [the priest] shall take [with his finger] some of the blood of the purification offering,” so that the ritual slaughtering and the taking, that is the receiving of the blood will be for the sake of the sin-offering. But the meal offering of jealousy, since it is written concerning it "עון"/wrongdoing [as in] (Numbers 5:15): “a grain-offering of remembrance which recalls wrongdoing,” the Rabbis compare it to the sin-offering. And the meal-offering of the Omer, even though it is not a sinner’s meal-offering and is not the meal offering of jealousy, if a handful was taken not for its sake/name, it is invalidated from being offered up as incense, and none of its residue is consumed, since it came to permit the new [grain] crop [that ripened before Passover], and it did not permit it. But all of the meal-offerings that were grasped [from the grain] not for its sake/name are kosher, as is taught in our Mishnah, we are speaking especially with meal-offerings that don’t have a fixed time, but not of the meal-offering of the Omer that [the Torah] established a fixed time for it.
או שלא לשמן ולשמן – that you should not say for their sakes/name and not for their sakes/name that it is invalidated, for the latter language takes effect, but [both] not for their sakes/name and for their sakes/name are kosher/fit, this is what it comes to tell us.

Mishnah 2

זר ואונן וטבול יום כו' – all of them are explained in the Second Chapter of [Tractate] Zevakhim [Mishnah 1], and we prove them from Scriptural verses that their Divine Service is invalid.
ערל – a Kohen whose brother died on account of ritual circumcision.
יושב – that we require to stand to minister/serve [before God].
על גבי כלים כו' – that we require that there will not be anything that divides/cuts off between him and the floor.
בן בתירא אומר יחזיר – the handful of the meal-offering which the priest takes to be put on the altar into the meal-offering.
ויחזיר ויקמוץ בימין – and same law applies to all of these invalidates that are considered in our Mishnah, Ben Beteyra holds that if someone transgressed one of them and took a fistful, he should return the handful of the meal-offering to its place and a kosher/fit Kohen should take a handful of the meal-offering to be put on the altar into the meal offering. But the Halakha is not according to Ben Beteyra.
עלה בידו צרור – it was found that the handful of meal-offering which the Kohen takes to put on the altar was missing the place of the stone or a grain of salt or a particle of frankincense, for prior to taking a fistful of meal-offering he singles out all of the frankincense to one side and takes a handful of meal-offering and afterwards collects it and places with the handful of meal-offering and burns everything. But if he happens upon a grain of salt or a particle of frankincense, the handful of meal-offering is missing according to the place of the particle [of frankincense].
מבורץ – full and overflowing.
שקמצו בראשי אצבעותיו – he did not stretch them over the entire palm of his hand.
פושט את אצבעותיו על פס ידו – the sides of his fingers enter into the flour and he brings in the flour into his hand and smooths it with his small finger so that the flour will not go outside of the fistful and he he smooths it with his thumb that the flour would not leave outside of his finger. And this he had to do with meal-offerings prepared in a pan (i.e., fried in a flat pan) or [a meal-offering] prepared in a deep pan (i.e., fried in a container full of oil) that their creations are baked and after they their baking, he crumbles it and takes a fistful. But it is impossible to crumble it so much into thin pieces, for they would not go forth from the fistful, therefore, he smooths them with his thumb from above and with the small finger (i.e., pinky) from below. And these were of the most difficult [acts] of Divine service that were in the Temple. That in this great difficulty one is able to compare that he would not be missing or have too much. And Maimonides wrote, that the words of the one of said that this is a difficult [act] of Divine Service were set aside, and he explains and he takes a fistful of the meal-offering as people would take fistfuls that is mentioned in the Gemara [i.e., Tractate Menahot 11a], that he fills his palm from it in the manner that people fill their hands from what they take in their hands. But I say, that that the explanation is not as how people take a fistful [of meal-offering] but rather, causes the sides of his fingers to enter into the flour that he brings in the flour with the sides of his fingers into his hand, but he doesn’t take the flour but rather fills three of his fingers until the palm of his hand and not further, in order that it will be cutting through from end to end and burst forth and come out, he smooths it from below with his small finger (i.e., pinky) and from above with a thumb. And that the words of the one who said that this is a difficult act from the difficult acts of Divine Service that is in the Temple are not set aside and the method of the Gemara is like m words. And such all of my teachers have explained it.

Mishnah 3

ריבה שמנה – for the measurement of [olive] oil is a LOG (i.e., the equivalent of six eggs’ bulk) for every Issaron (i.e., Omer = one-tenth of an Ephah). But if he put in too much, that he gave two LOG or more for an Issaron which appears as two meal-offerings, he has disqualified it.
חיסר שמנה – less than a LOG of [olive] oil for an Issaron of sifted fine-flour.
חיסר לבונתה – that he didn’t put in it other than a grain/particle/drop of frankincense. But if it has in it two grains, it is fit/kosher, as it is written (Leviticus 6:8): “with all the frankincense that is on the grain offering,” implying even one drop of frankincense, for [the word] "כל"/all [from the verse in Leviticus 6:8:"את כל הלבונה אשר על המנחה" ] implies a little bit, as it is written (2 Kings 4:2): “”Your maidservant has nothing at all, [except for a jug of oil].” [The word] "את" includes another grain/particle/drop of frankincense, that makes two, whereas if he increased its frankincense, this is not taught [in the Mishnah] , and he did not disqualify/invalidate it other than when he increased it more than two handfuls [of meal-offering] for then he increased it too much.
לאכול שייריה בחוץ – outside of the Temple courtyard.
או להקטיר קומצה בחוץ – for thought/plan disqualifies whether that he though about the eating of a person whether he thought about the consumption by the altar, as it is written (Leviticus 7:18): “If any of the flesh of his sacrifice is eaten/אם אכל יאכל מבשר זבח שלמיו ,” Scripture is speaking about two consumptions: one is for that which a person consumes and another is that which the altar consumes, and this Biblical verse speaks of thought/intention, as it is written (Leviticus 7:18): ‘it shall not count for him who offered it/המקריב אתו לא יחשב לו,” and he did not disqualify it other than when he thought about it to consume it on the third day (i.e., see Leviticus 7:18: "ביום השלישי לא ירצה" /”[is eaten] on the third day, it shall not be acceptable”).
פסולה – that the intention/plan outside of its [proper] place invalidates the taking a handful of the meal-offering as it invalidates in the ritual slaughter of the animal offering. And just as one disqualifies an animal offering with ritual slaughter, the receiving of the blood, bring it [to the altar], and sprinkling the blood, one disqualifies the meal-offering through taking a handful, putting it in sacred vessels, and bringing for burning the handful [of meal-offering] and the frankincense on the altar, four [sacred] acts corresponding/parallel to four [sacred acts]. For the taking of a fistful [of grain] and the frankincense themselves are considered concerning the meal-offering like the blood and the sections that are offered on the altar regarding he animal offering. And the residue/remnants of the meal-offering are consumed. And in Chapter two of [Tractate] Zevakhim [the entire chapter] all of these disqualifying factors are explained and there we derive all of them from Scriptural verses.
לאכול דבר שדרכו לאכול – such as the residue/remnants.
דבר שדרכו להקטיר – such as the priest taking a handful of meal-offering to place on the altar. But, if he intended/thought to eat the handful of meal-offering or to offer the residue as incense on the altar outside of its appropriate time, he did not disqualify it, for his thought was disqualified regarding all other people.
ובלבד שיקרב המתיר – the handful of the meal-offering כהלכתו – as if it was kosher, for there was no disqualification other than the offering disqualified because of inappropriate intention alone. But if there is another disqualification, it is no longer considered disqualified because of an inappropriate intention, and there is no extirpation.
בשתיקה – that he did not think any thought at the time of taking a handful of the meal offering.
ונתן והלך והקטיר חוץ לזמנו – that is to say, that in these three acts of Divine service, he thought about consuming the residue outside of the appropriate time [for this act].

Mishnah 4

קמץ חוץ למקומו – he intended/thought at the time of taking a handful of the meal-offering to consume the residue/remnants outside of the Temple courtyard.
נתן בכלי הילך והקטיר חוץ לזמנו – and in one of these three acts of Divine service, he intended to consume the residue/remnants outside of the [proper] time period.
מנחת חוטא וקנאות – there is in them one other invalidation that removes them from being פיגול /an offering disqualified by having an improper intention, such as not for its own sake/name, as we stated at the beginning of our chapter (i.e., Mishnah 1), that invalid [meal] offerings, if he took a handful of the meal-offering not for its own sake, and he thought/intended regarding the three other acts of Divine service (i.e., the taking of a handful of the meal-offering to consume its residue outside of the Temple courtyard, and to offer it up at the altar at an inappropriate time and to consume it at an inappropriate time) that they would be performed outside of their [proper] time, or even the first [of the three] outside of its appropriate time, and the rest that were not done for their own sake, he removed it from being an offering disqualified by having an improper intention [and being subject to extirpation].
או קמץ או נתן בכלי או הוליך או הקטיר שלא לשמן – that is to say, whichever of these that he did not for its own sake and the remainder in order to consume the residue/remnants outside of the [appropriate] time , he did not offer that which is permitted in accord with its requirement, but there is no extirpation with its residue/remnants.
כזית בחוץ כזית למחר – he intended/thought with one of the acts of Divine service that two intentions would be done outside of the [appropriate] time period and outside of its [appropriate] place (i.e., the Temple courtyard. But until now, we have been speaking about two acts of Divine service that he intended with one of them outside of its [appropriate] time period and with another outside of its proper place, but now we are speaking about [the case] where he intended both of them with one act of Divine service. But for Rabbi Yehuda, it is necessary, that one does not say that Rabbi Yehuda disputes on two [acts] of Divine service, for we follow after the first [act]. But with one [act] of Divine service, he agrees, but it comes to tell us [that this is not the case].
זית למחר וכזית בחוץ – even though that he intended first [to perform the act] outside of the [appropriate] time period, his second act of taking it outside [the Temple courtyard] makes him [liable] for extirpation.
אמר רבי יהודה זה הכלל כו' – Rabbi Yehuda disputes with the first Tanna/teacher, whether with one [act] of Divine service or whether with two [acts] of Divine service. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

הקומץ את המנחה. מודה ר' יוסי שהוא פגול (Rabbi Yossi’s statement is equivalent to what is found in Tractate Menahot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 3) – because it is necessary to teach the ending clause: “to burn its frankincense on the morrow, Rabbi Yossi states that it is invalid, but there is no extirpation,” you might have thought that the reason of Rabbi Yossi is because that he holds that he does not make a sacrifice rejectable through improper mental disposal (see Leviticus 19:7) with the half which fits the sacrifices for eating, that is to say, that if he thought to perform the act of Divine service on the morrow that the act of Divine service of half permits it, he did not have an inappropriate intention, and this frankincense is one-half makes the object permissible for enjoyment, for whether it is the burning on the altar of the handful of meal-offering and the frankincense which permit the residue, but even the first clause of the Mishnah, when he thought with the burning on the altar of the handful of meal-offering is an act of Divine service which is half permissible, and Rabbi Yossi disputes, this comes to teach us that in this he agrees. For the reason is not because of this, but rather because that which permits does not invalidate by inappropriate intention that which is permitted.
מה שנה זו מן הזבח – that he ritually slaughters it in order to offer up those parts of the sacrifice on the altar on the morrow, it is an offering disqualified by inappropriate intention.
אינה מן המנחה – it is not from the species of the meal-offering like the taking of a fistful of meal-offering, and even though it is from those that permit the meal-offering. For Rabbi Yossi holds that what makes an object permitted for eating cannot unfit another act of the same nature (i.e., if the priest on offering a handful of flour had in mind an unlawful application of the frankincense, the latter is not hereby made rejectable – see Talmud Menahot 13b, for the act of Divine service with that which is permitted which is the taking of a handful of the meal-offering have any effect to invalidate by inappropriate intention something else that is permitted which is the frankincense, which is a thought on the frankincense while performing the act of taking the handful of meal-offering. But the Rabbis say to him: just as we state , that what makes an object permitted for eating cannot unit an other act of the same nature, where he did not establish with one of them, as for example, the two lambs for Atzeret/Shavuot, where both of them permit the bread, but if he ritually slaughtered one of them in order to eat its companion on the morrow, both of them are kosher, but where he established with one of them, such as the handful of the meal-offering and the frankincense in one utensil, his thought-process [to eat one of them at a different time] of one act which fits the sacrifice for eating makes unfit by inappropriate intention another act of the same nature. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 2

שחט שני כבשים – of Atzeret/Shavuot, as it is written regarding them (Leviticus 23:19): “[You shall also offer one as a he-goat as a purification offering] and two yearling lambs as a sacrifice of well-being,” and those yearling lambs permit and sanctify the two loaves, for the bread is not holy other than with the slaughtering of the two yearling lambs, since they were needed with it in waving. But the rest of the lambs of Atzeret/Shavuot, are of the Musaf [sacrifice].
לאכול אחת מן החלות למחר – for the time for the eating of the loaves is none other than during that day and night, like the law of the meal-offering, where it states concerning it (Leviticus 7:7): “The reparation offering/כחטאת is like the purification offering/כאשם. [The same rule applies to both: it shall belong to the priest who makes expiation thereby].”
הקטיר שני בזיכים – for two piles of wood on the altar in the Temple of the shewbread , as it is written (Leviticus 24:6): “Place them on the pure table before the LORD in two rows, six to a row,” there was on each pile of wood one spoon which has in it frankincense, as it is written (Leviticus 24:7): “With each row you shall place pure frankincense, [which is to be the a token offering for the bread, as a gift to the LORD].” And these two spoons which in them is placed the frankincense are called the two censers/vessels. And the frankincense is burned as it is written (Leviticus 24:7): “which is to be token offering for the bread, And the bread is consumed, and the time for its consumption is only all of that week that they remove it from the table. But if at the time when the two censers of frankincense are offered, he thought of one of the other piles of wood on the altar of bread to eat it on the morrow, that is to say, not at its appropriate time.
אותה חלה – of the two loaves of Atzeret/Shavuot.
ואותו הסדר – of the shewbread.
זה וזה פגול – for all of them are considered as one body.
נטמאת אחת מן החלות – and specifically when one of the two loaves are defiled before the sprinkling of the blood of the lambs, or one from the rows prior to the burning of [on the altar] of the dishes/censers, is what Rabbi Yehuda and the Rabbis disagree upon. But if it was defiled after the sprinkling of the blood or after the burning of the dishes/censers, everyone agrees that what is defiled remains in its defiled state and that which is pure can be eaten.
שאין קרבן צבור חלוק – in the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 15a) it reaches a definite conclusion that Rabbi Yehuda stated that this matter is not from a Scriptural verse nor from logic, but rather it is an accepted teaching in the mouth of Rabbi Yehuda, and such it was received from his Rabbis/teachers that an offering of the congregation may not be divided, and if half of it was disqualified, all of it is disqualified.

Mishnah 3

התודה מפגלת את הלחם – that the bread (i.e., loaves) comes for the thanksgiving offering and it is of secondary import to it, but the thanksgiving offering is not of secondary import to the bead. And similarly, the two lambs of Atzeret/Shavuot, the two loaves that come with them are of secondary import to the lambs but the lambs are not of secondary import to the bread, but the principal [item(s)] make the sacrifice rejectable through improper mental disposal but that of secondary import do not make the sacrifice rejectable through improper mental disposal. But if it was necessary for the Tanna/teacher to teach this law regarding the thanksgiving offering but it was not necessary [to teach this law with regard] to the lams of Atzeret/Shavuot, I would think that it is there that the when the bread makes the sacrifice rejectable through improper mental disposal, the thanksgiving-offering does not make the sacrifice rejectable through improper mental disposal because it was not dependent upon the waving with the loaves, but the lambs [for Atzeret/Shavuot] which were dependent upon the waving with the loaves, as it is written (Leviticus 23:20): “The priest shall elevate these – the two lambs- together with the bread [of first fruits as an elevation offering before the LORD],”I would say that the bread makes the sacrifice rejectable through improper mental disposal to also make the lambs rejectable through improper mental disposal. But if the Tanna/teacher taught [only] the lambs, I would state there that when the lambs make the sacrifice rejectable through improper mental disposal, it makes the bread rejectable through improper mental disposal because they were dependent upon each other in waving, but the thanksgiving-offering which were not dependent, I would state that when the thanksgiving offering makes the sacrifice rejectable through improper mental disposal, it does not make the loaves rejectable through improper mental disposal, hence, they are both necessary.

Mishnah 4

הזבח מפגל את הנכסים – and a person who drinks from them is punished with extirpation.
משקדשו בכלי – after they placed them in the sacred vessels, for the vessel sanctifies them with an eternal holiness, and furthermore they don’t have any redemption.
דברי ר' מאיר – for Rabbi Meir holds that the libations make the sacrifice rejectable, because the blood of the offering is what makes it appropriate and permits them for the altar. And since they have something that makes it permitted, it becomes rejectable through an intention/thought outside of its proper time. But the Sages dispute him in the Tractate Zevakhim in the chapter “The School of Shammai” (Chapter 4, Mishnah 3 – Talmud Zevakhim) [44a] and they (i.e., the Sages] state that the libations do not have that which makes them permissible [for consumption], therefore they do not become rejectable. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.

Mishnah 5

פיגל בקומץ – in the burning on the altar of the handful of meal-offering, he thought about the eating the residue/remnants not at their appropriate time.
עד שיפגל בכל המתיר – for the burning on the altar of one of them is half of what makes an object permitted for enjoyment, for there is also the burning on the altar of its partner, for the residue of the meal-offering is not permitted for consumption by a Kohen until he burns on the altar the handful of the meal-offering and the frankincense.
במנחת חוטא ובמנחת קנאות – which do not have frankincense, and the handful of meal-offering alone is what is permitted [for consumption].
שחט אחד מן הכבשים – [he slaughtered one] of the lambs of Atzeret/Shavuot. But the bread is not permitted other than after both of them (i.e., the lambs) have been ritually slaughtered.
הקטיר אחד מן הבזיכין – for behold it does not permit the bread other than through the burning of both of them on the altar.
ר' מאיר אומר פגול – for he holds that half of what is permitted also makes improper intention. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

הקומץ את המנחה לאכול – outside of its appropriate time period.
דבר שאין דרכו לאכול – as for example, the handful of meal-offering and the frankincense.
ולהקטיר – outside of its appropriate time period.
דבר שאין דרכו להקטיר – the residue/remnants are accustomed to be consumed but are not accustomed to be offered as incense upon the altar.
כשר – that this is not considered thought/intention, for he has rescinded his thought regarding all people.
רבי אליעזר פוסל – as it is written (Leviticus 7:18): “If any of the flesh of his sacrifice is eaten [on the third day, it shall not be acceptable],” Scripture speaks of two consumptions (i.e., האכל יאכל), one is the consumption of a human being and one is the consumption of the altar, to tell you that just as the consumption of a human being invalidates it for a person, as for example, residue/remnants if a person thought of consuming them outside of the appropriate time, and the consumption of the altar for the altar, as for example, a handful of meal-offering, if he considered/intended to offer it up on the altar not at its appropriate time, such his intention/thought invalidates the consumption of a human being if he thought about them regarding the altar to offer them up outside of their appropriate time, since the All-Merciful excluded both of them in the language of “eating,” we learn from this that they are the same, and we account from this one (i.e., food from sacrifices) to that one (i.e., “food” for the altar). But the Rabbis hold, that for thus, the All-Merciful excluded for burning on the altar in the language of “consuming/eating”, to tell you that just as eating is an olive’s bulk, so also consideration of burning on the altar is an olive’s bulk. But always, “eating” is in its manner is implied, the taking of a handful of meal-offering to the altar and the residue/remnants is for a person [for consumption]. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 2

לא יצק – the order of the meal-offering; at the beginning he places the oil in a utensil and after that places the fine-flour, and after that he returns and pours the oil and stirs it and this is explained in the chapter [seven in Tractate Menahot], "אלו המנחות נקמצות" /These meal-offerings are grabbed” [75a
לא יצק ולא בלל כשר – as for example, he put all of the oil that was in the Log in the first gift which is prior to performing it. But if he was missing its oil, we stated in the first chapter [Tractate Menahot 11a – see Mishnah 3 in Chapter 1] that it is invalid. And in the Gemara in our chapter [18b], it proves that pouring is indispensable (i.e., it invalidates the act by its omission), and it explains [the phrase] “that he didn’t pour,” that a Kohen didn’t pour, but rather a non-Kohen (i.e., literally, “a foreigner”), that from the grabbing of a handful of meal-offering is the command for the priesthood, but pouring and stirring/kneading are appropriate for a foreigner (i.e., non-Kohen), but it teaches, that he didn’t stir, by force it means that he didn’t mix/stir at all, for mixing/stirring definitely is not indispensable and our Mishnah should be read as follows: “if a Kohen did not pour but rather [it was done] by a foreigner, or he didn’t stir/mix at all, it is appropriate/kosher.
לא פתת (didn’t break the meal-offering into small pieces) – as it is written (Leviticus 2:6): “Break it into bits [and pour oil on it; it is a grain offering].” Even though it is written regarding a meal offering fried on a flat pan alone, the same law applies for all the meal-offerings that are baked first, such as for example, meal-offerings prepared in a flat pan and meal-offerings prepared in a deep pan, fried in a container filled with oil and that which is baked, it is commandmen to crumble all of them and afterwards take a handful of the meal-offering. And in a case wherehe did not crumble other than in order to take a fistful
לא מלח –[he did not salt] the entire meal-offering, but rather [only] that he took a handful of for a meal offering. But whereas, the salting of the handful is indispensable (i.e., it invalidates an act by omission).
לא הניף – in the sinner’s meal-offering and the meal-offering of jealousy (i.e., for a husband suspecting his wife of infidelity) requires waving.
לא הגיש – as it is written (Leviticus 2:8): “[it shall be brought to the priest] who shall take it up to the altar.” For the Kohen brings it to the altar and brings it near/offers it in the southwestern corner [of the altar] opposite the point of the corner (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 5, Mishnayot 5-6).
פתיתים מרובות – much larger than the expressed law for the meal-offering of an Israelite , doubling one into two [pieces] and two into four [pieces] and divides them (see Talmud Menahot 18b and Tractate Memahot, Chapter 6, Mishnah 4) . And it is necessary to inform/teach us about large broken pieces and even though they inforom us that if he did not break them into small pieces, it is kosher/fit. For o might think I would say that there, where is the the law of loaves upon them, but here where there isn’t the law of loaves , and there are no [small] broken pieces, I would say, no, there it comes to teach us that the opposite is true (i.e., that this is not the case).
ולא משחן (see Mishnah Menahot, Chapter 6, Mishnah 3) – the wafters require anointing [with oil], as it is written (Exodus 29:2): “and unleavened wafers spread with oil,” after their baking we anoint them with oil over and over until he depletes all the oil in the LOG (i.e., a LOG equals the amount displaced by six eggs).
במנחת כהנים כשרה – that all of them are burned entirely like it
כמנחת כהן המשיח ובמנחת נסכים פסולה (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 6, Mishnah 2) – because the mixture of the handful of meal-offering of an Israelite is thick. One LOG of oil er an Issaron of fine flour, and the meal-offering accompanying libations [of wine] and that of the anointed priest, their mixture is soft, three LOGS for an Issaron (= 10 Ephah) , as it is written for the meal offering accompanying libations (Numbers 15:4): “[the person who presents a gift to the LORD shall bring as a grain offering:] a tenth of a measure of choice flour with a quarter of a HIN mixed in, and in the meal-offering of the anointed priest, it states (Leviticus 6:13): “a tenth of an ephah of choice flour as a regular grain offering, [half of it in the morning and half of it in the evening].” Behold it is for you like the meal-offering of the daily offering with is an Issaron of fine flour in a quarter-log of a Hin.
והן בולעות זו מזו (each absorbs from the other) – the handful of meal-offering absorbs from the meal-offering accompanying libations and from the meal-offering of the anointed priest, and the oil of these meal-offerings is greater than the handful of the meal-offering and nullifies it, and it is a meal-offering whose handful of meal-offering was not offered as incense and that which was gathered in the handful is disqualified. But the meal-offering accompanying libations is fit/kosher, for there wasn’t like its oil had been increased, since it wasn’t intentionally that the oil was mixed when it absorbs it is nullified regarding it, and it is as if it doesn’t exist. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 3

אם יכול לקמצן מזו בפני עצמה וזו בפני עצמה – that this [meal-offering] fell on this side of the utensil and that [meal-offering] fell on the other side [of the utensil] and there remained from them enough in order to grab a handful that did not get mixed/combined, they are acceptable/fit (i.e., literally, “kosher”). But if not, they are disqualified, for it says in the Law of the Kohanim (i.e., Leviticus 2:2): “[And the priest shall scoop out of it a handful] of its choice flour and its oil, ”but not from the fine flour of its neighbor.
לא יקטיר – and even all of that which is mixed, for the burning on the altar is not a Mitzvah other than when grabbing a handful [of meal-offering], and the person who gathers a handful of meal-offering does not grab two handfuls [of meal-offering] for perhaps in each handful of meal-offeringf there is some from this one that became mixed, and there isn’t a complete handful from one meal-offering.
ואם הקטיר – [if he offered up for burning on the altar] – all of the mixture, it doesn’t go to the credit of its owners, for a handful was not grabbed ‘for a meal-offering] and a freewill meal-offering is not permitted without taking a handful [of meal-offering].
נתערב קומצה בשייריה – he cannot offer it up all of for burning on the altar because the residue/remnants are prohibited to burn on the altar, as it is written (Leviticus 2:11): “[for no leaven or honey] may be turned into smoke as a gift to the LORD,” all that is from it for fire-offerings is included in not turning into smoke (see: Leviticus 2:11): “[for no leaven or honey] may be turned into smoke [as a gift to God].”
נטמא הקומץ והקריבו, הציץ מרצה ([if] the handful was made unclean and one [nonetheless] offered it up, the priest’s frontlet effects acceptance) – as it is written (Exodus 28:38): “[It shall be on Aaron’s forehead,] that Aaron may take away any sin arising from the holy things [that the Israelites consecrate],” he doesn’t take away anything other than the sin of ritual defilement, in which it has a lenient side which was permitted to the community from its general principle, as it is written, regarding the daily burnt-offering (Numbers 28:2): “at stated times,” and even when in a state of ritual impurity.
ואינו מרצה על היוצא (but it doesn’t effect acceptance for that which goes forth [beyond the veils – see Tractate Zevakhim, Chapter 8, Mishnah 12) – for even though it also has a lenient side that is permitted on the temporary/improvised altar from its general principle, that is forbidden when it leave from the Tabernacle, but was permitted in the temporary/improvised altar that was in Nob and Givon, where there weren’t veils there, nevertheless, the priest’s frontlet does not affect acceptance when leaving [beyond the veils], as it is written (Exodus 28:38): “to win acceptance for them before the LORD,” yes to a sin before God, no to a sin that leaves the veils [outside of the Tabernacle].

Mishnah 4

כמדת ר' אליעזר כשרה – on the knowledge of Rabbi Eliezer who stated in the chapter [seven of Tractate Pesahim 77a] “How do they roast [the Passover offering],” the blood even though there is no flesh/meat, that is so [regarding] the handful of meal-offering , even though there is no residue/remnant, it is appropriate/kosher to offer up the handful of meal-offering as incense.
כמדת ר' יהושע – who stated that if there is no flesh, there is no blood, that is so [regarding the meal-offering] that it is also invalidated to offer up the handful of the meal-offering. And this is where there did not remain anything from the residue/remnants that was not defiled. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.
שלא בכלי שרת – for the handful of meal-offering was not sanctified in a sacred vessel. But at the beginning of the meal-offering no one disagrees that it requires a utensil, as we stated in the chapter [eleven of Tractate Menahot, Mishnah 4] “The Two Loaves.”
ורבי שמעון מכשיר – the reason of Rabbi Shimon is explained in the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 26a), because it states in Scripture (Leviticus 6:10): “it is most holy, like the purification offering and the reparation offering,” and since the All-Merciful made an analogy [between] the meal-offering to the sin-offering in his (i.e., the Kohen’s) service with a gift with his actual finger, we learn from it that the taking of a handful of the meal-offering also, if he wanted, he performs it with his hand without a utensil. And as long as he performs the service with his right hand, similar to the sin-offering where it is stated in regard to it, “finger,” as it is written concerning it (Leviticus 4:25): “The priest shall take with his finger some of the blood of the purification (i.e., sin) offering [and put it on the horns of the altar of burnt offering],” and every place where it states “finger” and “priesthood” is not other than with the right-hand. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
הקטיר קומצה פעמים – half of a handful of meal-offering at one time, and half of the handful of the meal-offering at another time. And specifically, that [the Mishnah] used the term “twice,” and not more/further, for no handful of meal-offering can be less than two olives’ bulk and when he disputes the two “occasions” , it is found that the offering up as incense is not less than an olive’s bulk, and therefore it is kosher/appropriate, but if he had divided it into three or four times that he would have made the burning on the altar with less than an olive’s bulk, it would be invalid.

Mishnah 5

מיעוטו מעכב את רובו – that if it was missing even a little bit, it is invalid, as the All-Merciful states (Leviticus 2:2 and 5:12): “[and present it to Aaron’s sons, the priests. The priest shall scoop out of it] a handful of its choice flour and oil.”
העשרון – a meal-offering that is less than an Issaron (i.e., one-tenth of an Ephah), even a bit, is invalid.
היין – half of a Hin (a Hin is 12 LOGS or 72 eggs’ volume) for a bull, and one-third of a Hin for a ram, and a fourth of a Hin for a lamb. And similarly, the oil, whether for the meal-offering libations which is like the measurement for the wine, whether for a meal-offering of a free-will offering which is one LOG of oil.
הסולת והשמן – of the meal-offering
מעכבים זה את זה – as it is written (Leviticus 2:16): “[And the priest shall turn a token portion of it into smoke:] some of the grits and oil, [with all of the frankincense, as a gift to the LORD].”
הקומץ והלבונה מעכבים זה את זה – as it is written (Leviticus 6:8): “A handful of the choice flour and the oil of the grain-offering shall be taken from it, with all the frankincense that is on the grain offering, [and this token portion shall be turned into smoke on the altar as a pleasing odor to the LORD].”

Mishnah 6

שני שעירי יום הכיפורים – “the goat designated by lot for the LORD” (Leviticus 16:9) and “the goat designated by lot [to be sent] to Azazel” (Leviticus 16:10).
שני כבשי עצת – the two yearling-lambs of peace-offerings that come as an obligation on the two loaves (see Leviticus 23:19-20).
שתי חלות – the two loaves of Arzeret/Shavuot.
ושני סדרים – two arrangements [of piles of wood on the altar] of the shewbread, six loaves for each arrangement.
שני בזיכין – two pans in which there is frankincense, which are placed on the arrangements.
הפדרים והבזיכין מעכבין זה את זה – for if the arrangements of the bread are not on the table, he should not place in it the pans/vessels of frankincense. But if there are no pans/vessels, he should not place the bread.
שני מינים שבנזיר – (see Numbers 6:15) – unleavened cakes and unleavened wafers.
ושלשה שבפרה אדומה – (see Numbers 19:6) – cedar wood, hyssop and crimson stuff.
ארבעה שבתודה – four species of the bread that they bring on the sacrifice of well-being/thanksgiving (see Leviticus 7:12-13) – leavened cakes [with oil mixed in], unleavened wafers [spread with oil] and cakes of choice flour [with oil mixed in, well soaked and cakes of leavened bread.
ארבעה שבלולה – Lulav/palm branches and Etrog/citron fruit, myrtle and willow (see Leviticus 23:40). If he takes all four of them on each day completely, even though he takes one of them in the morning and one of them at eventide, he fulfilled his religious obligation, for we hold that the Lulav does not require binding. But if one of these species is missing and he took all the [other] three, he has not fulfilled the Mitzvah at all.
ארבעה שבמצורע – (see Leviticus 14:6) cedar wood, the crimson stuff and the hyssop, together with the live bird.
שבע הזיות שבפרה – [the seven sprinklings that are connected with the] red heifer , as it is written (Numbers 19:4): “[Eleazar the priest shall take some of the blood with his finger] and sprinkle it seven times towards the front of the Tent of Meeting.”
שבע הזיות של בין הבדים – on Yom Kippur. As it is written (Leviticus 16:14): “and in front of the cover he shall sprinkle some of he blood with his finger seven times.”
ושעל הפרוכת ושעל מזבח הזהב – (see also Tractate Zevakhim, Chapter 5, Mishnayot 1-2) on Yom Kippur with the bullock of the anointed priest and with the bull for an unwitting communal sin and the goats for idolatrous worship, all of these require sprinkling on the curtain and on the golden altar like it is explained in the Torah portion of Vayikra and in Aharei Mot, and the goats of idolatrous worship, we increase them from Scripture as it is written (Leviticus 4:20): “He shall do with this bull just as is done with the [priest’s] bull of purification offering.” “With this bull” – this is the bullock of the anointed priest. “The purification/sin offering” – these are the goats of idolatrous worship. And the four gifts that are on the four corners that are on the golden altar also are indispensable one for another, even though they are not mentioned in the Mishnah.

Mishnah 7

שבעת קני מנורה – as it is written (Exodus 25:32): “Six branches shall issue from its sides,” and the biddle branc, makes seven branches of the Menorah.
שתי פרשיות שבמזוזה – the Shema/”Hear [O Israel]” (i.e., Deuteronomy 6:4-9) and V’Haya Im Shamoah/”If you will surely hearken “(i.e., Deuteronomy 11:13-21).
ואפילו כתב אחד מעכבן – even one letter which is attached to its neighbor and is not surround by a certain kind of parchment according to the legal requirement is invalid in a Mezuzah and in Tefillin/phylacteries and in a Torah scroll.
ארבע פרשיות שבתפילין –“Kadesh”/”Sancify/Consecrate to Me” (Exodus 13:1-10), “V’Haya Kee Yeviakha”/”And when [the LORD] has brought you”(Exodus 13:11-16), “Shema”/Hear [O Israel] (Deuteronomy 6:4-9) and “V’haya Im Shamoah”/”If you will surely hearken” (Deuteronomy 11:13-21).
מעכבות זו את זו – whether in the Tefillin/phylactery of the head where they write each individual portion in a self-contained piece of superior split parchment, or whether in the Tefillin/phylactery of the hand where all four [of the portions] are written on one piece of superior parchment.
ארבעתן ארבע מצות – but they are not indispensable to each other, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yishmael.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

התכלת אינה מעכבת את הלבן – although it is a Mitzvah to place two threads of Tekhelet/blue and two threads of white or one thread of Tekhelet and three threads of white, nevertheless, this does not impair/invalidate by omission the other, and if he placed all four of them with Tekhelet or all four of them with white [threads], he has fulfilled his religious obligation.
תפלה של יד אינה מעכבת של ראש – Maimonides wrote, specifically that both (i.e., the Tefillin of the hand and the Tefillin of the head) are found with him. But only one of them is found with him, he should not put on the one until he has found the other since we make a decree lest he error and rely always on the one [only]. But this is not according to the Halakha, for the one who says this in the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 44a) retracted based upon the strength of what he was questioned but rather one who does not have [in order to fulfill] the two commandments, he should not even observe the one commandment, is to be read as a question [in astonishment]! But the Halakha is that whether both (i.e., the Tefillin of the arm and Tefillin of the head are found with him or whether they are not found with him, they do not impair/invalidate by omission the other, and so have admitted all of my teachers/Rabbis that this is the Halakhic practice.
הסולת והשמן – of the libations of the meal-offering.
אין מעכבין את היין – of the libations that if they brought the wine without the fine flour and the oil, he offers as a libation.
המתנות של מזבח החיצון – as, for example, the four gifts of the sin-offering.
אין מעכבות זו את זו – that if he did not give other than one [of them], he has atoned, as it is written (Deuteronomy 12:27): “the blood shall be poured out [on the altar of the LORD your God],” that one pouring/spilling is implied.

Mishnah 2

הפרים והאילים והכבשים – those that are written in the Torah portion of “Speak to the Priests” (Leviticus 23:18): “With the bread you shall present, as burnt offerings to the LORD, seven yearling lambs without blemish, one bull of the herd, and two rams” that come with the two loaves of Atzeret/Shavuot. אינם מעכבים (do not impair the validity of one another) – the two bulls and the one ram and the seven lambs of the Musaf/Additional offerings of Atzeret/Shavuot that are written in the Torah portion of Pinhas (Numbers 28:27). For [two] bulls of the Musaf/Additional offerings do not impair the bull of the two loaves, neither does the bull of the two loaves impair the two bulls of the Musaf/Additional offerings. And similarly the two rams of the two loaves do not impair the one ram of the Musaf/Additional offerings, nor the one ram of the Musaf/Additional offerings impairs the two rams of the two loaves. And similarly, the lambs do not impair neither these nor those.
רבן שמעון אומר אם היו להם פרים מרובין – that is to say, money in order to purchase bulls by the way for their needs, and they did not have money to purchase libations, they should bring one bull and its libations. And they derive it from Scripture, as it is written (Ezekiel 46:7): “And he shall provide a meal offering of an ephah for the bull, an ephah for the ram, and as much as he can afford for the lambs [with a hin of oil to every ephah],” can it really be that the measure of bulls and rams is one, but isn’t the meal-offering of the bulls is three Issaron and the meal offering of the rams two issaron, but rather to inform you hat it is better to bring one bull, one ram with his ephah, the measure that is appropriate for him, than to bring many bulls and many rams without their meal-offerings. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 3

הפר ואילים הכבשים והשעיר – that come on account of the loaf [of bread]. And all of them are burnt-offerings except for the goat which is a sin-offering.
אין מעכבין את הלחם – that if they brought the two loaves of Atzeret/Shavuot without these sacrifices, they are sanctified.
הלחם מעכב את הכבשים – these lambs are the two lambs of the peace-offerings that were required for waving with the loaves.
והכבשים אין מעכבים את הלחם – if lambs were not found, they bring the two loaves and they are holy as if they had brought them with the lambs.
קרבו כבשים בלא לחם – for they didn’t have bread in the wilderness other than Manna.
הלכה כדברי בן ננס – that the lambs impair the [loaves of] bread.
אבל אין הטעם כדבריו – for he says that in the wilderness that they offered up the lambs of peace-offerings and this is not the case.
שכל האמור בחומש הפקודים – in the Book of Numbers, as for example, the Musaf/Additional sacrifices that are mentioned in the Torah portion of Pinhas (Numbers 28:16-29:39), they offered up in the wilderness.
וכל האמור בת"כ – that is in the Book of Leviticus. They did not offer them up in the wilderness. And these lambs that are mentioned in “Speak to the Kohanim” (the Torah portion of Emor) such as the seven lambs and the bull and the rams of the burnt offering that are upon the [loaves of] bread and the two lambs of the peace offerings they did not offer up in the wilderness (see Leviticus 23:18).
ויש בלא כבשים אין לו מי יתירנו – that the [loaves of] bread is not permitted to be consumed for the Kohanim until they offer up the lambs. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 4

התמידים אינן מעכבין את המוספין – In the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 49a) it explains that concerning the matter of precedence it is stated, and they do not impair each other. For if he requires daily whole offerings, he offers them first and if he requires Musaf/Additional offerings, he offers them first, but even though it is written (Leviticus 6:5): “[every morning the priest shall feed wood to it,] lay out the burnt offering on it [and turn into smoke the fat parts of the offerings of well-being],” and this implies that the burnt-offering, that is, the burnt-offering of the daily whole offering will be the first of all of the sacrifice, but this is not other than a mere commandment but it does not impair [the others].
אמר רבי שמעון אימתי כו' – In the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 50a) it explains that the Mishnah is deficient and it should be read as follows: if they did not offer up a lamb in the morning, he should not offer it up at eventide. When is this said? When the altar was not dedicated, but if the altar was dedicated, he can offer it up at eventide. Rabbi Shimon stated: Under what circumstances? When they subject to constraint or in error, but if they deliberately did not offer a lamb in the morning, they should not offer it at eventide. And this is its explanation: if they did not offer the daily whole offering of the morning, they should not offer the daily whole offering of the eventide, and this is a rabbinic expounding of Scripture, if (Numbers 28:4): “you shall offer one lamb in the morning, [and the other lamb you shall offer at twilight],” the second was pronounced fit to be offered at eventide, but if not, you don’t. Under what circumstances? When the altar was not dedicated, for this Biblical verse is written concerning the dedication of the altar in the Torah portion of “You (i.e., Moses) shall command”/Tetzaveh, as it is written above it (Exodus 29:38): “Now this is what you shall offer upon the altar: [two yearling lambs each day, regularly],” But if the altar was dedicated, that he had already offered upon it sacrifices, even if he did not offer the daily whole offering of the morning, he may offer the daily whole offering of the eventide, as it is written in the Torah portion of Pinhas (Numbers 28:8): “The other lamb you shall offer at twilight, preparing the same grain offering and libation as in the morning,” but in this Biblical verse, it is not written (see Numbers 28:4): “you shall offer one lamb in the morning,” and it is taught in [Midrash] Sifrei [B’midbar]: this verse, why is it mentioned? Wasn’t it already mentioned above in the portion (verse 4): “and the other lamb you shall offer it [at twilight]?” Because it states with it, “you shall offer one lamb in the morning,” behold that he did not offer up the one for the morning, I hear that he did not offer it up at twilight, the inference teaches us the latter verse (Numbers 28:8): “The other lamb you shall offer at twilight,” but if they deliberately [did not offer the lamb in the morning], he should not offer it at twilight, those who act deliberately, but other Kohanim are able to offer it.
לא הקטירו קטורת בבוקר יקטירו בין הערבים – that the incense is not found/on hand with one person, he should offer up the incense many times like that of a burnt offering, as we stated in [Tractate] Yoma [26a], that a person who did not ever engage with it repeatedly because it makes a person wealthy, as it is written (Deuteronomy 33:10): “They shall offer You incense to savor [and whole-offerings on Your altar],” and near it (verse 11), “Bless, O LORD, his substance,” therefore, we don’t fine them, since it is beloved for them and they do not willfully sin regarding it, and it is not found that those who sin deliberately will leave
שאין מחנכים את מזבח הזהב אלא בקטורת הסמים – at twilight/eventide, as it is written (Exodus 30:7): “he shall burn it every morning when he tends the lamps,” meaning to say, that when he cleans the Menorah from the ashes that are there from the kindling of the candles. But if he did not do the candle lighting in the evening, why does he need to repair it in the morning, so we see that the dedication of the Menorah is at twilight. And since the Menorah was dedicated in the evening, the incense is also dedicated in the evening, as it is written (Exodus 30:8): “And Aaron shall burn it at twilight when he lights the lamps, [- a regular incense offering before the LORD throughout the ages].”

Mishnah 5

חביתי כהן גדול – the meal-offering of the High Priest that he brings every day, on account that it is written concerning it (Leviticus 6:14): “Shall be prepared with oil on a griddle,” because of this, it is called, griddle-cakes.
לא היו באות חצאין – that he should not bring from his house one-half of an Issaron/tenth in the morning and half an Issaron/tenth in the evening.
ולא חצי עשרונו של ראשון – [the one-half] that remained from the complete Issaron/tenth first [Kohen Gadol] who died had brought [in the morning] for he had not offered anything other than the [first] half.
ושני חציין אובדים – half of the Issaron/tenth of the first [High Priest] who died and half of the Issaron/tenth of this one who stood [in his place].
משל צבור – as it is written (Leviticus 6:15): “[And so shall the priest, anointed from among his sons to succeed him, prepare it; it is the LORD’s] – a law for all time – [to be turned entirely into smoke],” this law will be from that which shall be forever, meaning to say, from the community from the collection of the money stored in the chamber [in the Temple complex].
רבי יהודה אומר משל יורשים – as it is written (Leviticus 6:15): “And so shall the priest, anointed from among his sons,” and it implies the following, that the anointed priest who dies, from those who succeed him (literally, “under him”), will perform it.
ושלימה היתה קריבה – whenever it comes from the community according to Rabbi Shimon or from the heirs [of the Kohen Gadol who died] according to Rabbi Yehuda, it should be offered whole, a complete Issaron and not one-half of an Issaron. Rabbi Shimon derives it from (Leviticus 6:15): “to be turned entirely into smoke/כליל תקטר,” that should not be turned into smoke in halves, but rather entirely when it comes from the community. But Rabbi Yehuda derives it from what is written (Leviticus 6:15): “from among his sons to [to succeed him] prepare it/מבניו יעשה אותה,” when one of his sons offers it up after his father died, that is the heirs, he should do it, but not half of it. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda that it comes from the heirs.

Chapter 5



Mishnah 1

כל המנחות באות מצה חוץ מחמץ שבתודה – as it is written (Leviticus 7:13): “This offering with cakes of leavened bread added.”
ושתי הלחם – as it is written (Leviticus 23:15): “baked after leavening.”
שאור היה בודה להן מתוכן (leaven is set aside for them from their own [contents]) – from the Issaron/tenth of thanksgiving offering and the two loaves [of bread], he removes the yeast, that he would knead from the fine flour a little after it was measured and preserve it in fine-flour and it leavens on its own and from it the rest leavens, for from another place, he would not be able to ring it so that there wouldn’t be extra meal-offering.
והיא אינה מן המובחר – and it doesn’t leaven well, because it does not have yeast from the good vinegar.
אלא מביא שאור – that is from good vinegar from within his house, and places it it within the Issaron and adds and fills it in with fine flour.
אף היא היתה חסרה או יתירה – as for example, the yeast was thick and kneads with difficulty with a little water, it doesn’t hold a large volume as if it were flour and it is found that the Issaron is greater, for if the yeast/leaven were kneaded its yeast/leaven would be greater than now. But if it is not kneaded well, that he placed in a lot of water, it is found that is volume is greater than if it were flour and it was found that the Issaron is less, for were it not for the water, it would not be full. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

שנאמר כל המנחה אשר תקריבו לה' לא תעשה חמץ – it refers to the first clause [of the Mishnah] as it teaches that they are watched so that they do not become leavened, and it is speaking of prior to grabbing a handful . But the residue/remnants we derive from a different verse, as it is written (Leviticus 6:10): “It shall not be baked with leaven; [I have given it] as their portion [from My gifts],” even the portion of the priests which are the residue of the meal-offering that remained from the handful, even this shall not be baked with leaven, and with leaven, it is especially mentioned regarding the residue, but it is permitted to knead them with honey and to fry them with oil in it.
עריכתה (rolling it) – when he engages it with his hands after kneading, and they are liable for each and every one, for since it is says (Leviticus 2:11): “[No grain offering that you offer to the LORD] shall be made with leaven,” he is not able to be liable except for one [offering], the inference teaches us that “it should not be baked” (Leviticus 6:10), that baking was included and why was it excluded, to make an analogy of Biblical verses to it, just as baking is special that it is the action of an individual and one is liable for it on its own, even I include kneading it and rolling it and all individual actions regarding it, to include forming and smoothing the surface of the dough which is the action of an individual and we are liable for it on its own. And forming and smoothing the surface of the dough is smoothing its face in water and even though it does not appear so much as an action.

Mishnah 3

מנחת סולת – a person who vows a mere free-will meal-offering, brings fine flour and oil and frankincense and mixes it and takes a handful as it is prior to baking it. And for which it is written (Leviticus 2:1): “he shall pour oil upon it, lay frankincense on it,” all of these others we derive from the meal-offering of fine flour where it is written regarding the meal-offering of fine flour (Leviticus 2:1): “when a person,” that implies that all meal-offerings of an individual require oil and frankincense.
והחלות והרקיקין – a meal-offering of grain that is baked in an oven is called, the loaves [of bread] and the wafers. For if he requires loaves [of bread], he brings them and if he requires wafers, he brings wafers.
ומנחת כהנים – a Kohen who volunteers to donate one from these five meal-offerings.
מנחת כהן משיח – the meal-offering of unleavened cakes (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 4, Mishnah 5).
גוי – [a heathen] who freely donates a meal-offering as we derive from "איש איש"/anyone (Leviticus 17:8 – “If any one of the house of Israel or of the strangers who reside among them offers a burnt-offering or a sacrifice”) which teaches that heathens bring votive offerings and free-will offerings like Israelites.
ומנחת נשים – a woman who vowed to donate a meal-offering.
ומנחת נסכים – which does not require frankincense, for oil is stated with it but not frankincense (see Numbers 15:4-5).
ולחם הפנים – it is written regarding it (Leviticus 24:7): “With each row you shall place pure frankincense, [which is to be a token offering for the read, as a gift to the LORD].” But oil is not written there.
שתי חלות – of Atzeret/Shavuot, but it is not mentioned on them neither oil nor frankincense (see Leviticus 5:11: “he shall not add oil to it or lay frankincense on it, [for it is a purification offering].”
מנחת חוטא ומנחת קנאות – it is written explicitly regarding them (Leviticus 5:11): “he shall not add oil to it or lay frankincense to it” (and Numbers 5:15: “No oil shall be poured upon it and no frankincense shall be laid upon it for it is a grain offering of jealousy.”).

Mishnah 4

וחייב על השמן – if he placed upon the meal-offering for a sinner or on the meal/grain-offering of jealousy.
נתן כלי – which contains oil.
על גבי כלי – of the meal/grain-offering of the sinner.
לא פסלה – and we don’t say that behold he transgressed on what is written in the Torah (Leviticus 5:11): “he shall not add oil to it [or lay frankincense to it],” for the Torah did not warn other than that he should not place the oil into the fine-flour or into the flour.

Mishnah 5

טעונות הגשה – with regard to the thanksgiving offering of he southwestern corner [of the altar] as it is written (Leviticus 2:8): “[When you present to the LORD a grain offering…it shall be brought to the priest] who shall take it up to the altar.”
והחלות והרקיקין – an offering of grain baked in the oven.
מנחת כהנים – that is completely burned.
וכל שאין בהם קמיצה – to permit the residue/remnants from the meal-offering for the Kohanim, and they don’t have bringing near [of the sacrifice]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 6

לוג ואשם מצורע – it is written with regard to them (Leviticus 14:12): “and he shall elevate [them as an elevation offering before the LORD].”
והבכורים כדברי ר' אליעזר בן יעקב – we have the reading, meaning to saying, that we prove from him who said plainly first-fruits require waving, and the Halakha is according to him.
ואימורי שלמי יחיד וחזה ושוק שלהם – it is explicitly written (Leviticus 10:15): “Together with the fat of fire offering, they must present the thigh of gift offering and the breast of elevation offering, which are to be elevated [as an elevation offering before the LORD].”
אחד שלמי אנשים ואחד שלמי נשים – that require elevation/waving.
בישראל אבל לא באחרים – it explains in the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 61b) that this is what he said: both those of Israelite men and women, their sacrifices require waving, and the waving itself is by an Israelite [male], but not by women, for it is stated in a Baraitha, that male Israelites wave, but the heathens do not wave; male Israelites wave but the daughters of Israel do not wave.
שתי הלחם וכבשי שלמים של עצרת – that come on account of the bread. It is written concerning them (Leviticus 23:20): “The priest shall elevate these – the two lambs- together with the bread of the first fruits as an elevation offering before the LORD,” not on them specifically, but rather near them, the lambs at the side of the bread, according to the words of Rabbi [Judah the Prince] in the Baraitha. And such is the Halakha.
שנאמר – [concerning the ordination of Aaron] (Exodus 29:27): “the breast that was offered as an elevation offering (i.e., waived) and the thigh that was offered as a gift offering (i.e., raised) [from the ram of ordination – from that which was Aaron’s and from that which was his sons’],” and from that which was offered as an elevation offering and that which was elevated as a gift offering, we derive the rest of the waiving done: the waiving - bringing them forward and backward; and the raising of them – upward and downward.
תנופה היתה במזרח – meaning to say, even in the east of he altar one is able to wave, and all the more so, on the west side which is closer to the Sanctuary.
ותנופות קודמות להגשות – first he waves/elevates and afterwards brings it near. But in the meal-offering of the Omer and the meal-offering of jealousy we are speaking s that they require elevation and bringing near, as it is written with regard to the meal-offering of jealousy (Numbers 5:25): “elevate the grain offering [of jealousy] before the LORD” and afterwards (ibid.,): “and present it on the altar.”

Mishnah 7

שלשה מינין – the individual peace-offering, and the communal peace offering which are the lambs of Atzeret/Shavuot, and the guilt offering of the leper. These three kinds [of offerings] require between the three of them three rituals: laying of the hands [while the animal is yet alive, waving of the animal while alive and the waving of slaughtered animals.
שתים – rituals from these three are done with each kind, but the third is not done with them, because there are only two for each kind.
שלמי יחיד – it is written with them laying of the hands in [the Torah portion of] Vayikra (i.e., Leviticus 3:2: “He shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering and slaughter it at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting.”).
ותנופה שחוטים – regarding their breast and thigh, in [the Torah portion of] Tzav (i.e., “Command Aaron” – see Leviticus 7:31-32).
שלמי צבור – it is written with them waving while alive (Leviticus 23:20): “The priest shall elevate these – [the two lambs – together with the bread of the first fruits as an elevation offering before the LORD],” that is while they are alive, and the waving of those that are slaughtered, that the breast and thighs are theirs, as we derive from the individual’s peace offerings. But placing of the hands [on the head] is not required, for the Halakha was decided for it that there aren’t in all of the communal sacrifices other than two laying of the hands alone, the lay of the hands on the scapegoat [of Yom Kippur] (Leviticus 16:21) and [the laying of hands] on the bull for an unwitting communal sin (Leviticus 4:15).
אשם מצורע – it is written concerning it, a living waving (Leviticus 14:12): “And he shall elevate them [as an elevation offering before the LORD],” in [the Torah portion of]: “This shall be the ritual of the leper.” But laying of the hands, that it is impossible for an individual sacrifice that he should not lay his hands upon the head of his sacrifice.
אבל לא תנופה שחוט – that the All-Merciful excluded concerning the individual peace-offering, (Leviticus 7:30): “the breast to be elevated as an elevation offering before the LORD,” אותו/it – to exclude the guilt offering of the leper which does not require the elevation of something already slaughtered.

Mishnah 8

מרחשת עמוקה – as it is written (Leviticus 7:9): “and any that is prepared in a pan” implying within it, so we see that it has something inside/within.
ומעשיה רוחשין (and what is inside it moves/vibrates – like jelly – see Tractate Menahot 63a) – that the oil within moves about within it. The language of (Genesis 1:16): “that creep on the earth,” which we translate in Aramaic as moves/swarms. But there are those who have the reading that its contents are soft, that is to say, that is kneaded product/dough is soft.
ומחשבת צפה – as it is written (Leviticus 7:9): “or on a griddle,” implying on it but not within it. So we see, it has nothing inside/within.
צפה – it is not deep but rather its edges float near its rim/border of the vessel, like “floating on the top of the water.”
ומעשיה קשים – that the dough that fries in it that which was kneaded is hard in order that it not pour outside, for the utensil lacks a rim/border.

Mishnah 9

כופח (small stove, brazier)– in a place where broke one pot and sometimes they heat it and brake dough in it.
רעפים (hot tiles) – TULASH in the foreign tongue. Made from earthenware and they heat it in a kiln.
ויורות הערביין (fire places of the Arabs/a cavity in the ground laid out with clay – see Tractate Kelim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 10 and Tractate Menahot 63a) – a kind of indentation/hole made in the ground and they fastened with plaster and they burn fire inside it until it becomes white hot and they bake dough in it.
אם רצה יביא מעשה כופח – for the brazier is a small stove, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
מנחת מאפה – it is written regarding it loaves and wafers (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 6, Mishnah 5).
לא יביא מחצה חלות – for all the meal-offerings come in groups of ten, and this he should not bring as five loaves and five wafers, but rather either all of them are loaves or all of them are wafers.
מפני שהוא קרבן אחד – for both of them are written in one-meal offerings, therefore he is able to bring half of this kind and half of another kind. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Chapter 6



Mishnah 1

אלו מנחות נקמצות – the meal-offering of fine flour, its dough is grabbed, and the meal-offering prepared/fried in a flat pan and the meal-offering prepared/fried in a deep pan, and the loaves and wafers, that is basked, they crumble them after their being baked. But the meal-offering of fine flour is written explicitly, קמיצה/a handful (Leviticus 2:2: “[and present it to Aaron’s sons, the priests.] The priest shall scoop out of it a handful/וקמץ משם מלא קמצו of its choice flour and oil, as well all of its frankincense,” and the others are written as אזכרה /a token portion (Leviticus 2:2: “and this token portion [he shall turn into smoke on the altar, as a gift of pleasing odor to the LORD],” and this אזכרה/token portion is the handful [of meal-offering].
מנחת גוים או נשים – who made a free-will offering of one of these.
מנחת העומר – אזכרה/this token portion is written regarding it (Leviticus 2:16: “And the priest shall turn a token portion of it into smoke: some of the grits and oil, with all of the frankincense, as a gift to the LORD.”).
מנחת חוטא וקנאות – it is written regarding them קמיצה/grabbing a handful (see Leviticus 5:12: “He shall bring it to the priest, and the priest shall scoop out of it a handful as a token portion of it, and turn it into smoke on the altar.”).
מנחת חוטא של כהנים נקמצת – even though the meal-offering of the Kohen is burned entirely, as it is written (Leviticus 6:16): “So, too, every grain offering of a priest shall be a whole offering: it shall not be eaten,” nonetheless, it requires taking a handful.
והקומץ קרב לעצמו והשיריים קרבן לעצמן – but according to the first Tanna/teacher, the meal-offering of the Kohen is not taken in a handful, but rather is offered in smoke as it is, for he holds that all meal-offerings where the residue/remnants are consumed is taken in a handful but its residue/remnants which are consumed are not taken in a handful. But the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher.

Mishnah 2

בזה יפה כח המזבח – it was not necessary to teach this, for we see that in this, the power of the altar is greater, and it is a simple matter. But rather to include the individual who gives a freewill offering of wine to altar without a sacrifice, so that you should not say that he drips it over the burnt-offerings on the fire, and it is completely burned and the power of the altar is not greater in this, it comes to teach us that this is not the case, but rather, he offers the libation like other libations and goes down to the pit by the side of the altar into which the remainder of the libations were poured, that is like two perforations/incisions that were in the altar and they would go down below until the foundation, in order that the power of the altar would be greater.
ובזה יפה כח הכהנים – to include the two [loaves of] bread of Atzeret/Shavuot, if he brought them by themselves with out the lambs, that you should not say that they stand for burning but not for consumption since the lambs were not offered up as sacrifices that permit them, it comes to teach us that in this way, the power of he Kohanim was greater forever, for they stood for consumption and not for burning (see Tractate Menahot 74b).

Mishnah 3

הנעשות בכלי – as for example, the meal-offering prepared in a deep pan [in a container full of oil] and a meal-offering prepared by frying on a flat pan which are made in a utensil.
טעונות שלש מתנות שמן – to exclude that meal-offering which is baked in an oven that does not require pouring [of oil].
ומתן שמן בכלי קודם לעשייתן – first he places the oil in a service/sacred vessel and places fine flour on top of it, as it is written regarding the meal-offering prepared in a deep pan (Leviticus 2:7): “[If your offering is a grain offering in a pan,] it shall be made of choice flour in oil,” that is to say, that it shall be placed, so we see that it requires the placing of oil prior to its being made, and regarding the meal-offering prepared by frying on a flat pan, it is written (Leviticus 2:5-6): “[If your offering is a grain offering on a griddle,] it shall be of choice flour with oil mixed in, unleavened. Break it into bits and pour oil on it;” mixing and pouring is written, but putting oil in a utensil first is not written regarding it, but with a meal-offering prepared in a deep pan [in a container full of oil], that oil is placed in it but pouring and mixing/stirring is not written, and we learn this from that, it is stated, קרבנך/your offering (Leviticus 2:7) with the meal-offering prepared in a deep pan [in a container full of oil] and it is stated קרבנך/your offering (Leviticus 2:5) with the meal-offering prepared by frying on a flat pan/griddle , and how does he make it? He places oil first in the sacred vessel and places upon it the choice flour, [and he returns] and puts upon it oil and mixes/stirs it, behold there is the placing of oil in a utensil and mixing/stirring, and he kneads it with water and bakes it in an oven and crumbles it and pours oil upon it after crumbling/breaking it into pieces, and this is the pouring of the oil, behold three of them, and he grabs a handful and offers up the handful in smoke and the rest is consumed by the Kohanim.
והחלות בוללן דברי רבי – now we are speaking of the meal-offerings baked in an oven which produces loaves or wafers, and it is written concerning it (Leviticus 2:4): “[When you present an offering of grain baked in the oven] it shall be of choice flour: unleavened cakes with oil mixed in,[or unleavened wafers spread with oil].” Rabbi [Judah the Prince] holds that loaves mixed with oil is written, and he mixes them when they are loaves. But the Rabbis hold that mixed/stirred choice flour is written, teaching us that it is mixed/stirred when it is choice flour. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
חלות טעונות בלילה והרקיקים משוחים – as it is written (Leviticus 2:4): “unleavened cakes with oil mixed in,” but wafers do not have it (i.e., oil) mixed in. wafters are spread with oil, but unleavened cakes are not spread with oil.
כיצד מושחן כמין כי – Greek (in the form of an X) – our letter ט' – like the separation of the thumb [of the left hand] from the fingers [like this C].

Mishnah 4

כל המנחות הנעשות בכלי – here it does not come to include the meal-offering that is baked in an oven, as it is written (Leviticus 2:6): “Break it into bits and pour oil on it; it is a grain offering,” but to include all the meal offerings for breaking into bits, but rather to exclude the two loaves and the shewbread which do not require breaking into bits/crumbling.
כופל אחת לשנים – as it is written (Leviticus 2:6): “Break it into bits,” breaking them (i.e., plural) which is two, for since it was broken, that is two pieces, “bits,” we extend the scope that each piece is broken into two, which is four. It is possible that he can make them crumbs, the inference teaches us, “into bits,” but not its bits into bits. And all of them are broken pieces like olives, that the concluding clause of the Mishnah is not Rabbi Shimon who states, but rather the words of all, for after he made the broken pieces like olives, he folds each olive into two and two into four.
מכפלה – he does not fold them up into four, but rather only into two, for it is not written concerning it other than the meal-offering of broken pieces but not [whole] pieces.
רבי שמעון אומר כו' – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 5

שיפה – he rubs the wheat between his hand and the utensil in order that it be pleasant to remove its husk.
בעיטה – that he strikes with the thickness of his fist or the thickness of the palm of his hand. And he would rub once and beat twice, [or] rub twice and strike three times, and he goes back and does it according to this order until he completes five hundred beatings to three hundred rubbings.
ה"ג ר' יוסי אומר בבצק – that is to say, rubbing and eating he dough but not the wheat. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yosi.
עשר עשר חלות – and the meal-offering of choice flour also even though that prior to baking a handful is taken, nevertheless, ten loaves are brought.
לחם הפנים – it is explicitly written regarding them twelve loaves (Leviticus 24:5: “You shall take choice flour and bake of it twelve loaves/שתים עשרה חלות, two-tenths of a measure for each loaf”).
וחביתי כהן גדול – it is stated regarding the shew bread, it is stated, “a due for all time/חק עולם” (Leviticus 24:9) and it is stated regarding the baked cakes of the High Priest (Leviticus 6:15): “חק עולם/a law for all time,” just as there (i.e., with the shew bread) there are twelve loaves, so here too there are twelve loaves, and we offer up six loaves in the morning and six loaves in the evening.
חוץ מחלות תודה שהן באות עשר (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 7, Mishnah 1) – that we require to state the reason further on tin that chapter. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Meir.

Mishnah 6

העומר היה בא עשרון משלש סאין – the meal-offering of the Omer that we bring on the morrow of [the first day of] Passover, they would reap three Seah which is an Ephah of barley, and grind it and wave it in a sieve thirteen times until they produce its fine flour of an Issaron which is the tenth of an Ephah. And the reason that they require an Issaron of Omer of three Seah of barley, since that it comes from new grain and it is of barley, , they have in it much coarse bran and a small amount of choice flour, and one doesn’t bring his choice Issaron other than from three Seah.
שתי הלחם שני עשרונים משלש סאים – for since they come from wheat, even though that it comes from new gain, for on Atzeret/Shavuot it is the new grain of wheat, nevertheless two choice tenths of an Ephah come from three Seah.
לחם הפנים עשרים וארבעים עשרונים – and thus it is written (Leviticus 24:5): “[You shall take choice flour] and bake of it twelve loaves, two-tenths of a measure for each loaf.”
מעשרים וארבע סאים – since they come from wheat and from old grain, we remove one choice Issaron from the Seah.

Mishnah 7

היה מנופה בשלש עשרה נפה – one above the other. And all of this is for the commandment, but it does not indispensable, for if he brought Omer Issaron from four Seah or he brought from two Seah, he did not invalidate it.
רבי שמעון אומר לא היה לה קצבה – and even ab initio the Sages did not give a limit from how many Seah of wheat or barely they bring the Omer or the two loaves or the shew bread, but rather we see in the choice flour that it was sifted according to its needs and it was sufficient. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Chapter 7



Mishnah 1

התודה חמש סאין ירושלמיות שהן שש מדבריות – five Seah of Jerusalem [measure] which are six from those that were in the wilderness during the days of Moses. That they added a sixth on the measure that was in the days of Moses. For we hold that we add on the measurements but we don’t add more than one-sixth. But that one-sixth is one-sixth externally/from the outside.
שתי איפות – that is to say, these six Seah which are two Ephahs, which are twenty Issaron/tenths of an Ephah, for in each Ephah are ten Issarons/tenths.
עשרה לחמץ – ten Issarons for ten unleavened loaves that are in the thanksgiving offering.
רבוכה – a paste made by stirring flour in hot water which is called רבוכה/pulp of flour mixed with hot water and oil (see Rashi) . But Maimonides (see the Laws of Maaseh HaKorbanot, Chapter 9, Halakha 19) explained that his pulp of flour mixed with hot water and oil has a lot of oil and it is roasted/parched in it, because there was oil in it corresponding to the loaves and the wafers.
נמצאו שלשה עשרונות ושליש לכל מין ומין – that is in the Matzah/unleavened bread.
שלש חלות לעשרון – they would have ten loaves for three Esronot and a third.
במדה ירושלמית – they did not have in them Esronot but rather Kabim, that these five Seah would be thirty Kabim. For the Seah is six Kabim. But in the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 77a) in a Baraita, it brings from an analogy that each and every species from the four kinds that are in the thanksgiving offering, and they stated, it is stated here (Leviticus 7:14): “Out of this he shall offer one of each kind as a gift to the LORD; [it shall go to the priest who dashes the blood of the offering of well-being],” and it is stated regarding the tenth of the tenth (Numbers 15:21): “You shall set aside a gift to the LORD from the first yield of your baking, [throughout the ages].” Just as there it is one out of ten, so even here it is one out of ten. And we learned that one kind is of leavened [flour] was ten Issarons corresponding to the three species of Matzah, from what is written (Leviticus 7:13): “This offering, with cakes of leavened bread added, [he shall offer along with his thanksgiving sacrifice of well-being],” the Torah stated corresponding to the leavened that comes the unleavened.

Mishnah 2

המלואים – that were in the days of Moses when Aaron and his sons were inaugurated/dedicated into the priesthood.
היו באים כמצה שבתודה חלות ורקיקים ורבוכה – as it is written in the inauguration (Leviticus 8:26): “From the basket of unleavened bread that was before the LORD, he took one cake of unleavened bread, one cake of oil bread, and one wafer, [and placed them on the fat parts and on the right thigh],” one cake of unleavened bread – these are the loaves, and the one cake of oil bread – this is the pulp of flour mixed with hot water and oil that they add into it oil corresponding to the loaves and the wafers. And the wafer is the wafter.
נזירות – the loaves of the Nazirite, as it is stated (Numbers 6:15): “a basked of unleavened cakes of choice flour with oil mixed in, and unleavened wafters spread with oil; [and the proper grain offerings and libations],” but the pulp of flour mixed with oil and water is not mentioned there.
שתי ידות – two parts of kinds of unleavened bread that are in the thanksgiving offering they were in the Nazirite offering, as it is explained further on.
נמצאו – for the Nazirite.
עשר קבין – that behold with the three kinds of unleavened bread that were associated with the thanksgiving offering, they were fifteen Kab, and they were ten [Kab] which were two thirds of the fifteen [for the Nazirite’s offering].
שהן שש עשרונות ועדוין – that is to say, more that was added to them, for there were three Issarons and one-third of each kind, as it was stated above concerning the unleavened bread that is in the thanksgiving offering, it is found that two kinds are six Issarons and two-thirds of an Issaron, which are as we state six Issaron and something left over.
ומכולן – from all of the four kinds that are in the thanksgiving offering, the Kohanim would take one from ten as a heave-offering.
שלא יטול פרוס – broken and cut into.
שיהיה כל הקרבנות שוין – the kinds will be equivalent, ten loaves for each kind [of animal].
שלא יטול תרומה מקרבן על חבירו – that if there was five [loaves] from this kind [of animal] and fifteen [loaves] from that kind of animal, it is found that he would separate from this one for that one.

Mishnah 3

השוחט את התודה בפנים – inside from the Temple courtyard.
ולחמה חוץ לחומה – In the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 78b) we establish that it is outside the wall of the House of Pagi. My teachers/Rabbis explained outside the outer wall of Jerusalem [but outside of the Temple courtyard is holy]. But even though it is written (Leviticus 7:12): “[If he offers it (i.e., the sacrifice of well-being/peace offering) for thanksgiving,] he shall offer it together with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes/והקריב על זבח התודה חלות [with oil mixed in, unleavened wafers spread with oil, and cakes of choice flour with oil mixed in, well soaked],” that implies, apparently that the bread is near it at the time of the sacrifice, we don’t expound [the word] "על"/nearby. But Maimonides has the reading of “the house of Bagi.” And he explains that it is a place close to the Temple Mount which is outside the wall of the Temple Mount and there they bake the meal/grain offerings. And on account of this, they would call it Bet Bagi, the language of bread/Bag of the king.
עד שלא קרמו בתנור – these are not bread, but rather mere dough [prior to their forming a crust].
שחטה – in order to eat it outside of its appropriate time, the bread is sanctified, but it (i.e., the offering) was done with the wrong intention and is disqualified. If on condition to eat it outside of its appropriate place, the bread is sanctified but it (i.e., the sacrifice) is disqualified. But the reason that the bread is sanctified, is because it is disqualified within the Temple courtyard. And we hold that any offering that was disqualified within the Temple courtyard, the Temple courtyard, the Temple courtyard receives it.
שחטה ונמצאת טריפה לא קדש הלחם – for its disqualification occurred prior to ritual slaughtering (see also Tractate Zevakhim, Chapter 9, Mishnayot 2-3).
שחטה ונמצאת בעלת מום ר' אליעזר אומר קדש – In the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 79a), it establishes it as a defect in the eye [which is not recognized], that with this defect Rabbi Eliezer held that if they (i.e., the sacrifices) went up [to the altar], they should not go down, since their defect is not recognized, therefore, the bread is sanctified. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
שלא לשמה – the bread is not sanctified, as it is written (Leviticus 7:13): “This offering, with cakes of leavened bread added, he shall offer along with his thanksgiving sacrifice of well-being,” on the sacrifice that was made for the sake of the peace-offerings of thanksgiving.
וכן איל המילואים – because they were the first of all the sacrifices, it (i.e., the Mishnah) took the ram of ordination. And the same law applies to the ram of the Nazirite, for the rams of ordination are considered like the sacrifice of an individual.

Mishnah 4

נסכים שקדשו בכלי – not exactly in a utensil. For the libations are not sanctified to be defiled by going out [of the Temple] or by being kept overnight, even though they were sanctified in a vessel, other than through the ritual slaughtering of the sacrifice, as it is written (Leviticus 23:37): “[Those are the set times of the LORD that you shall celebrate as sacred occasions, bringing gifts to the LORD – burnt offerings, grain offerings,] sacrifices and libations, [on each day what is proper to it],” the libations are dependent upon the sacrifices.
ונמצא הזבח פסול – that it was disqualified through the sprinkling [of the blood], for had it become disqualified through ritual slaughter, the libations would not be sanctified.
אם יש שם זבח אחר יקרבו עמו – we establish it in our Mishnah with the libations of the community, because the heart of the Jewish court makes a condition upon them, if they were needed for this sacrifice, they were needed, but if not, they would be for another sacrifice. But regarding the libation of an individual [offering], they are not appropriate/fit for another offering. But even the libations of the communal [offering] are not offered with another sacrifice unless it was the same sacrifice that was offered when the first sacrifice was disqualified, but if it was not offered at the time when the first sacrifice was disqualified, it is not offered with another sacrifice. But our Mishnah is deficient and should be read as follows: it should be sacrificed with it. When is this said? That the sacrifice was offered at the same time, but if the sacrifice was not offered at the same time, it becomes like it was disqualified by staying overnight and they are disqualified. And this is how our Mishnah is explained in the Gemara (see Tractate Menahot 79b). And all the time that the libations were not sanctified in a utensil, even though the sacrifice was ritually slaughtered, we are able to offer the libations even after several days, for we hold that a person brings his sacrifice today and his libation even after sevral days, whether it is the libations of an individual or whether it is the libations of the community. And similarly, the leper brings his guilt offering today and his Log of oil after several days.
ולד תודה – he separated out a pregnant thanksgiving offering and its young.
וכן המפריש תודתו ואבדה והפריש אחרת תחתיה אינה טעונה לחם – the first [bread] if it (i.e., the first sacrifice) was found after the offering up of the second. And similarly, the second, if the first was found prior to its being offered up and he offered up the first, the second no longer requires bread.
חליפתה – that is that he separates a thanksgiving offering and it was lost and he separated out another one in its place.
תמורתה – as for example, that it stands clearly visible and he states, “this is in place of that”, and it is written (Leviticus 27:33): “then it and its substitute shall be holy: [it cannot be redeemed].”

Mishnah 5

יביא הוא ולחמה מן החולין – but not from [Second] Tithe. For since he said, “I pledge myself/הרי עלי,” this is for him a matter that is of liability, and every matter that is of a liability does not come other than from that that which is unconsecrated.
ואם אמר הרי עלי תודה מן החולין ולחמה מן המעשר יביא היא ולחמה מן החולם – for the bread is dragged (i.e., attached) to the thanksgiving offering, for since he said, “I pledge myself [to bring] a thank-offering from that which is unconsecrated, he is forced to become liable for the bread, therefore, that which he repeats and states that its bread is from the [Second] Tithe is nothing.
תודה מן המעשר ולחמה מן החולין יביא – that is to say, he shall bring according to what he vowed. But it is not a requirement, for all the more so, if he would bring both from that which is unconsecrated, he acted well. But if he wants to bring like he vowed, he can bring.
ולא יביא הלחם מחטי מעשר שני עצמו – for we require bead that is similar to peace-offerings. Just as peace-offerings come from Second Tithe monies and not from Second Tithe itself, so too, the bread.

Mishnah 6

מה פסח שהוא בא בחובה אינו בא אלא מן החולין – that the Passover offering of Egypt did not come other than from unconsecrated [animals], for they did not yet have any Second Tithe grain for there was no tithe until they entered into the Land [of Israel], and just as the Passover offering of Egypt did not come other than from unconsecrated [animals] even the Passover offering for the generations did not come other than from unconsecrated [animals], for it states (Exodus 13:5): “You shall observe in this month the following practice,” that all the Divine service of this month would be like that of Egypt.
אף כל דבר שבחובה נמי כו' - therefore, the person who states, “I pledge myself [to bring] a thank offering or a peace offering” for since they come as an obligation, as it states, “I pledge myself [to bring}, he should not bring anything other than from that which is unconsecrated.
והנסכים – even if he said, “I pledge myself to bring them from [Second] Tithe, he should not bring them other than from unconsecrated [animals]. For when the All-Merciful permits to include peace-offerings from [Second] Tithe, these words of the peace-offerings themselves, are those things that are consumed, but the libations are burned entirely [on the altar] , he should not bring them from the [Second] Tithe.

Chapter 8



Mishnah 1

כל קרבנות. מן החדש ומן הישן – it is speaking of meal-offerings.
שאינן באים אלא מן החדש – regarding the Omer, it is written (Leviticus 23:16): “an offering of new grain,” and in regard to the two loaves of bread, it is written (Exodus 34:22): “of the first fruits of the wheat harvest.”
ומן הארץ – in regard to the Omer, it is written (Leviticus 23:10): “When you enter the Land [that I am giving you and you reap its harvest,” and with the two loaves [of bread] it is written (Leviticus 23:17): “You shall bring from your settlements two loaves of bread [as an elevation offering].”
מכמס וזוניחה – these are names of places (see Ezra 2:27 and Joshua 15:35, 56).
אלפא לסלת – their choice flour is first and chosen to all the choice/fine flour. Like this Aleph, it is the first of all the letters.
אלפא – this is Aleph in the Greek language.
שנייה להן – its choice flour is close to being praiseworthy like the choice flour of Michmas and Zonicha.
חפרים בבקעה – these are two Chafarayim -one in the mountains and one in the valley, and the one that is in the valley that its choice flour is praiseworthy.
כל הארצות – of the Land of Israel they were kosher/fit, but from here (i.e., the places mentioned in the Mishnah) they would bring them.

Mishnah 2

אין מביאין – the Omer nor the two loaves [of bread].
לא מבית הזבלים – from a field that needs to be manured, for perhaps it was not manured all of its need and it was found that its fruits were lean/weak. Alternatively, since the manure deteriorates and causes the loss of taste of the fruit.
ולא מבית השלחים – a land that is thirsty for water that its fruits are lean/week.
ולא מבית האילן – from grain that is among the trees, that the trees that grow there suck the ground and weaken the seeds.
נרה – ploughs. It is the language of (Jeremiah 4:3): “Break up the untilled ground,[and do not sow among thorns].”
ובשניה זורעה – In the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 84b) it reaches the definite conclusion that in the first year, he breaks up all of it and seeds half of it and leaves half of it as newly broken land, and similarly in the second year he ploughs all of it and seeds the half hat he didn’t seed in the previous year, and the half that he seeded in the previous year, he leaves it as broken land, and similarly in every year he seeds that which was broken in the previous year.
כיצד בודק – the choice flour if it is winnowed/sifted all that it needs to be or not.
עלה בידו אבק – thin flour and it is inferior.
עד שיניפנה – with a winnow to remove the thin dust that remains in it.
ואם התליעה – the choice flour or the wheat.
פסולה – and its majority had become maggoty/wormy. And we derive it further on at the end of the chapter (see Mishnah 7) from what is written (Numbers 28:19-20): “see that are without blemish. The grain offering with them,” (Numbers 28:31): “You shall present them – see that they are without blemish with their libations,” that the meal-offerings and the libations will be pure.

Mishnah 3

תקועה – a city whose name is Tekoa, as it is written (II Samuel 14:2): “So Joab sent to Tekoa [and bought a clever woman from there].”
אלפא לשמן – its oil is first-rate and choice of the oils. As this Aleph is the first of the letters.
אנפיקנון – oil that is made from olives that did not bring one-third of their ripening and it is very bitter.
שנשרו במים – that the water ruins the oil.

Mishnah 4

שלשה זיתים – three times during the year they harvest/prepare the olives. And in them there are three oils, and each time there are three kinds of oil.
הזית הראשון – the first time that they harvest/prepare [the olives].
מגרגרו בראש הזית – he harvests the berries that are at the top of the olive/tree, for they ripen first because the sun shines upon them and ripens them.
לתוך הסל – he refines them and [the oil] comes up and there is a utensil underneath the basked to receive the oil.
רבי יהודה אומר סביבות דופני הסל – he places the olives and the oil flows through the walls and falls into the rim of the basket and from there he refines it and goes up and it is found to be refined . For the refuse that remains is attached on to the walls of the basket. But he soul dot place them on the rim at the bottom of the basket, because they get combined with the oil and the sediment/lees and it is found that the oil is turbid. But the oil that flows from itself without any assistance rendered in loading up is called the first oil of the first olive.
טען בקורה – the olives that are in the basket.
רבי יהודה אומר באבנים – but not with a beam, for the beam is heaven and it removes the sediment/lees.
חזר וטחן – with a millstone, those olives that are under the beam and the beam presses them.
הראשון למנורה – that we require pure olive oil (see Leviticus 24:2).
והשאר כשר למנחות – for it is not written with them that it is pure [olive oil].
הזית השני – the second time when he harvests that which is found that are ripened now.
מגרגרו בראש הגג – he harvests the berries that are near the roof, for their olives were near their rooves, and those ripen second.
הראשון – that went out prior to the pressing [of the beam] are fit/appropriate for the Menorah.
הזית השלישי – when he harvests the third time, they don’t ripen sufficiently all the way, for they are branches that are under the roof where the sun does not reach them.
עוטנו (packs in an a vat preparatory to crushing) – the language of vat or pit where olives ar e packed until they form a viscid mass, and it is the indentation/hole where they place the olives in order that they can grow moldy/decay there, and the language is Biblical (Job 21:24): “His pails are full of milk; [the marrow of his bones is juicy].”
שילקה – that it will grow moldy/decay.
ומנגבו בראש הגג – because it is collected/piled up and gathered in one place for four or five days, it (i.e., the oil) flows on its own, there is a thin secretion and it is not pleasant, therefore it is necessary to dry them off.

Mishnah 5



Mishnah 6

קרותים והטולים – they are the names of places (in Judea; in the actual Talmud text of Talmud Menahot 86b, they are called קרוחים ועטולין and some have a reading of חטולין for the second location).
אליוסטן – sweet wine on account of the sun, for the grapes were suspended in the sun to sweeten them. Sun in the Greek language is יוסטן/Yostan [but in the Mishnah itself, it is called אליסטון ; in the Talmud (ibid.), it is called הליסטיון].
יין ישן – that twelve months have passed upon it, its redness/reddish color passes, and in Sceripture it states (Proverbs 23:31): “Do not ogle that red wine [as it lends its color to the cup],” so we see, at the time that it is reddish, it is choice [wine].
לא מתוק – when it is sweet on account of itself, for if it were on account of the sun, the first clause [of the Mishnah] would teach that if he brought אליוסטן /Elyostan, it would be kosher/fit (whereas it is only the de facto position where it is kosher according to the earlier passage in the Mishnah). Another explanation: wine that did not pass over it forty days, but the first [explanation] is essential.
מן הדליות (from branches of the vine trained to an espalier) – from the grape-vines that are suspended on top of beams of the loom and reeds that are high off the ground.
אלא מן הרגליות (grapes growing in a row on isolated vines) – from grape-vines that lie on the ground between the feet of people that are not trained to an espalier.
העבודים – that are tended to twice a year. That they did around the grape-vines to turn over the ground soil that are in their roots and make indentations/holes there to water them, and this is their being tended to.

Mishnah 7

בחצבים גדולים (large stone pitchers/earthenware jugs) – that these large utensils damage the flavor of the wine.
כדי שיהא ריחו נודף – when the wine jug/vessel is full, the smell/odor goes outside and does not spread.
קמחין – like small, thin, white berries that ascend over the face of the wine that are similar to flour.
ומאמצעה – he places a bung in the middle of the (earthen) wine jug .
קנה – the cubit of measurement was regularly in the hand of the treasurer.
זרק את הגיד והקיש בקנה – that is to say, when he tossed the wine, the froth of the sediment when the sediment begins to leave, the treasurer struck with a reed that was in his hand and pushed up away that he should not enter with a utensil that has wine in it. But my Rabbis/teachers explained that he struck with the reed that was in his hand to hint to the one pulling the wine from the (earthen) wine jug, that he should close the jug with a bung, and he would not say to him, ‘close it,” because the speech was difficult (i.e., injurious/bad) for the wine. And this is what it explains in the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 87a).
רבי יוסי בר' יהודה אומר יין שעלו בו קמחין פסול – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yosi b’Rabbi Yehuda. And all of those that we have stated in our Mishnah that are invalid, whether with choice flour, whether with oil or whether with wine, if he transgressed and sanctified them, we flog him with the floggings of rebelliousness according to the Rabbis, for it is like the law of someone who sanctifies [an animal] with a blemish to the altar, for he is flogged according to the Torah, as it is written regarding something with a blemish (Leviticus 22:20): “You shall not offer any that has a defect, [for it will not be accepted in your favor],” and they (i.e., the Rabbis) stated in the Sifra, that the words, לא תקריבו/you shall not offer, means nothing other than do not sanctify. And just as they would bring the choice flour and the wine and the oil from known choice places, as it is taught in our Mishnah, so they would bring the sacrifices from known places, rams from Moab, lambs from Hebron, calves from Sharon, and pigeons, that is turtle-doves and young pigeons from the Mount of the King.

Chapter 9



Mishnah 1

שתי מידות. עשרון עשרון וחצי עשרון (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 9, Mishnah 5) – there were two measures of an Issaron/Omer (1/10th of an Ephah), one we measure it heaped/overflowing, that it was small and would not support anything other than an Issaron when it was heaped/overflowing, like the size/limit of its neighbor when it smooth/level. For Rabbi Meir learned it from Scripture as it is written (Numbers 28:29): “and one-tenth for each [of the seven lambs]/עשרון עשרון לכבש האחד [לשבעת הכבשים],” for there were two Issarons there, and if both of them were equivalent, it would be for them one measure. But one is smooth/level and the other is heaped/overflowing. That which is heaped/overflowing in it, he would measure for all of the meal-offerings, that which is smoothed/leveled in it, he would measure for the cakes of the High Priest, but the Sages state that there wasn’t there other than one Issaron, as it is written (Numbers 29:4): “and one-tenth for each of the seven lambsועשרון אחד לכבש האחד [לשבעת הכבשים] ,” and that this particular Issaron was smooth/level, and through it they would measure all of the meal-offerings. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
לא בשל שלשה לפר – for the meal-offerings of libations of the bull as it is written concerning it (Numbers 28:12): “[As grain offering] for each bull: three-tenths of a measure [of choice flour with oil mixed in],” (and also Numbers 28:28 – though the text does not have ושלשה עשרנים but rather (שלשה עשרנים, they would not measure them with one measure for it holds three Esronim, for there was not a measure there that was larger than an Issaron.
אלא מודדן עשרונות each and every Issaron on its own.
הכי גרסינן, חצי עשרון מה היה משמש, שבו היה מודד לחביתי כהן גדול – and this is the explanation, for the baked cakes of the High Priest, he brings from his home a complete Issaron and they split it with half on half of an Issaron that is in the Temple, and he kneads each half-Issaron on its own, and makes from each half-Issaron six Hallot/loaves, which are for the two halves of the Issaron, twelve Hallot/loaves, and he bakes all of them together and afterwards he divides each Hallah/loaf in half and sacrifices twelve halves in the morning and twelve halves in the evening, but prior to his offering them, he crumbles them to olive-size piece, and doubles each crumble to two, and doesn’t separate them. But the opening of all of the rest of the meal-offerings even though their small pieces are like an olive, he doubles them into two and two into four and separates them as it is taught in the Mishnah (Tractate Menahot) chapter Six (Mishnah 4 – see also Chapter 4, Mishnah 5).

Mishnah 2

שנתות היו בהין (notches/teeth-like marks – the Hin (12 logs or 72 egg-bulks) measure in the Temple had marks – see Tractate Menahot 87b) – there wasn’t there anything but a Hin, and in it there were signs of nails or notches.
עד כאן לפר – one-half of a Hin.
עד כאן לאיל – one-third of a Hin.
ועד כאן לכבש – one-quarter of a Hin. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
וכי מה היה ההין משמש – that there wasn’t in the Temple a thing that required a complete Hin, for after all, they had no need for the Hin other than for the anointing oil (see Exodus 30:24) in the days of Moses and that kind of oil still exists, and if so, they had no need for a Hin [measurement].
אלא מדה יתירה (but there was a further measure) – it was there to complete the seven measurements.
למנחת כהן גדול – there were for it three LOG of oil, a LOG and a half in the morning and a LOG and a half in the evening.

Mishnah 3

רביעית מים למצורע – as it is written (Leviticus 14:5): “[The priest shall order] one of the birds slaughtered over fresh water in an earthen vessel,” into water that the blood of the bird shall be seen in them, and the Sages estimated one-quarter of a LOG.
רביעית שמן לנזיר – for the bread of the Nazirite [when he completes his period of Naziriteship]. But the one-quarter [of a LOG] he diodes not sanctify to be in a service vessel because of the one-quarter [of a LOG] of water of the leper, for this is outside [the Temple courtyard]. But not because of the bread of the Nazirite, for there bread of a Nazirite is not holy other than with the slaughter of the sacrifice. But, because in he would measure for the baked cakes of the High Priest a quarter [of a LOG] of oil for each and every Hallah [loaf], which are twelve Hallah loaves and their libations are three LOG of oil (see also Tractate Menahot, Chapter 7, Mishnah 2).
חצי לוג מים לסוטה – as it is written (Numbers 5:17): “The priest shall take sacral water in an earthen vessel,” half a LOT of mater he would fill from the basin (i.e., the laver for the priests in the Temple court).
חצי לוג שמן לתודה – It is a traditional interpretation of a written law, and similarly, a quarter [of a LOG] of the Nazirite. And the one-half LOG is also not because of the one-half LOG of water of the Sotah (i.e., suspected adulterous woman) and one-half of a LOG of oil of the thanksgiving offering is holy to be in the service utensils, but rather because that in it he separates one-half LOG of oil for each and every candle of the Menorah.
אין לה אלא לוגה – one LOG for every sixty Issarons. But the Halakah is not according to Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov (see also Tractate Menahot, Chapter 12, Mishnah 4).
ששה לוגים לפר – that is one-half of a Hin, as it is written (Numbers 15:9): “[three-tenths of a measure of choice flour] with half of a hin of oil mixed in.” And four Issaron for the ram, that is one-third of a Hin. And three Issaron for the lamb, that is one-quarter of a Hin, for the Hin is twelve LOG.
מחצי לוג לכל נר – that he must put in it its measure that it would continue burning from evening until morning, and the Sages estimated one and one-half LOG oil for the lengthy nights of the season of Tevet. And similarly, he would place in each candle on each night. But if it went out, that wick and the oil became disqualified from lighting with them further, but rather, he removes them and puts in another LOG of oil and a new wick and he kindles it.

Mishnah 4

מערבין נסכי פרים – the meal-offering of libations of the bull with the meal-offering of the libations of the ram. Because the mixing of both of them is equivalent, two LOGS for an Issaron, for it is taught in the Mishnah (Chapter 9, Mishnah 3 of Tractate Menahot): “six LOG for the bullock,” and choice flour of three Esronim that would be for them as it is written (Numbers 15:9): “there shall be offered as a grain offering along with the animal: three-tenths of a measure of choice flour with half a hin of oil mixed in,” which is six LOG. And for the ram, four LOGIM and choice flour of two Esronim.
נכסי כבשים – three LOGS for the Issaron, as it is written (Numbers 29:4): “and one-tenth for each [of the seven lambs],” and it is written (Exodus 29:40): “[there shall be a tenth of a measure of choice flour] with a quarter of a hin of beaten oil mixed in,” which are three LOGS.
ושל היום בשל אמש – if he brought yesterday’s sacrifice without libations. For we hold that a person who brings his sacrifice today and his libations from now until ten days hence. But if he brought today one sacrifice and two libations with him, one for himself and one for yesterday, they mixed them together if the sacrifices are equivalent, that both were lambs or rams [or bulls] or a bull and a ram.
אבל אין מערבים נסכי כבשים בנסכי פרים ואילים – because the meal-offering of the bull and the ram is dried up/destroyed in connection with the lambs and it absorbs from it, and it is found that the lamb is less and that one is greater.
ואם בללן – that already the commandment of their oil has gone.
כשרות – according to the Rabbis who dispute with Rabbi Yehuda in the chapter, the Great Handful in Tractate Menahot (Chapter 3, Mishnah 2) and they state that what is burned that became mixed with that which is became combined with something mixed can be sacrificed.
ואם עד שלא בללן – when they were combined.
פסולות – for we require that wherever [from the proportions and properties of the mixture a perfect fusion is possible/appropriate, but it is lacking, for it is missing that of the extra lamb and ram.
אע"פ שמנחתו כפולה – as it is written in [the Torah portion of] “Speak to the Kohanim”/Emor (Leviticus 23:13): “The grain offering with it shall be two-tenths of a measure of choice flour with oil mixed in.”

Mishnah 5

שהיה גודשה בתוכה – when there was an instrument for levelling a measure of grain/ a strike, it would hold like the rest a heaped up Issaron. But our Mishnah is according to Rabbi Meir who stated at the beginning of the chapter (Mishnah 1) that was an Issaron and an Issaron (i.e., two different forms of the Issaron) in the Temple, one that was leveled and one that was heaped. But the Halakha is not according to him.
בירוציהן – their heaping, for the moist also has a bit of a heaping.
מדות הלח בירוציהן קדש ומדות היבש בירוציהן חול – in the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 90a) it explains that this Tanna held that the measurements of that which is liquid were anointed whether from the inside or from the outside, therefore the rim of the utensil sanctifies them to be heaped up. The measurements of that which is dry were anointed from inside, but were not anointed from the outside, therefore their heaping did not touch from the inside in the place of their measurement it was not sanctified.
ר"ע אומר מדת הלח קודש – since he holds that the liquid measurements are anointed whether from the inside or whether from the outside.
מדות היבש חול – they were not anointed at all. However, what they measured of them was sanctified by the sanctify of the mouth (i.e., through the speech of mankind), but what did a person need anointing by mouth? When heaped up, he did not sanctify them for they did not require it.
רבי יוסי אומר לא משום זה – Rabbi Yosi held that both these and those (i.e., dry and liquid) were anointed from the inside but they were not anointed from the outside. But here is the reason, because the liquid is stirred up, that which is on the rim at the bottom of the vessel when they add to it is stirred and combined and mixed and goes up from above, and it is found that that which is heaped has already been sanctified within the utensil.
והיבש אינו נעכר – but rather it stands in its place, therefore, what is inside is holy and that which is outside is not holy.

Mishnah 6

חוץ מן הבכור והמעשר והפסח והחטאת והאשם – because it is written in the [Torah] portion of the libations (Numbers 15:3): “[and would present an offering by fire to the LORD from the herd or from the flock, be it a burnt-offering or sacrifice,] in fulfillment of a vow explicitly uttered, or as a freewill offering,” when it comes in the form of a vow or a freewill offering it requires libations, excluding the firstling and the tithe and the Passover offering and the sin-offering and guilt-offering that come as an obligation, not for a freewill offering, for they don’t require libations. One is even able [to bring] obligatory offerings that come on account of the Festival - on the Festival, as for example, the burnt offerings of appearance in the Temple/pilgrimage and the peace-offerings of the Festival do they would not require libations, the inference teaches us “or at your fixed occasions” (Numbers 15:3), anyone who comes on your fixed occasions is required to bring libations. But the goats of sin-offerings that come as a requirement for the Festival do not require libations, as it is written in the [Torah] portion of libations (Numbers 15:8): “And if it is an animal from the herd that you offer to the LORD as a burnt offering or as a sacrifice,” an animal from the herd was included, within the rule of (Numbers 15:3): “and would present an offering by fire to the LORD from the herd or from the flock,” that implies that all offerings by fire require libations except for [fire-offerings] that he (i.e., God) excluded, and why was it excluded? To make an analogy to it, that just as an animal from the herd is unique that comes as a vow or as a freewill offering, so also everything that comes as a vow or as a freewill offering, excluding the goats of the Festivals that come as sin-offerings, for the sin-offering does not come as a vow or as a freewill offering, for they don’t require libations (see Tractate Menahot 90b).
חטאתו ואשמו של מצורע טעונים נסכים – because they do not come for a sin-offering like other sin-offerings and guilt-offerings. For the sin-offering of a Nazirite does not require libations because the Nazirite [himself] is a sinner, as it is written (Numbers 6:11): “and make expiation for the guilt on his behalf for the guilt he incurred/מאשר חטא על –הנפש” – because he denied/restrained himself from the enjoyment of wine.

Mishnah 7

פר הבא על כל המצות – on one of all of the commandments, as for example, the Jewish court/Bet Din errantly ruled that forbidden fat is permitted, and this is bull brought for an unwitting communal sin [because of an active unwitting transgression committed by the Jewish people, as a result of an erroneous halakhic decision handed down by the Great Sanhedrin], that is in Scripture, and placing of the hands [on the head of the animal] is written concerning it (Leviticus 4:15): “The elders of the community shall lay their hands upon the head of the bull” and three from the elders of the Jewish court would lay their hands [upon the head of the bull].
ושעיר המשתלח – to Azazel, as it is written concerning it (Leviticus 16:21): “Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat [and confess over it all the iniquities and transgressions of the Israelites].”
שעירי עבודה זרה – as it is written in the [Torah] portion of Shelah Lekha (Numbers 15:22): “If you unwittingly fail [to observe any one of the commandments that the LORD has declared to Moses.” But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
כל קרבנות היחיד טעונים סמיכה – for the essence of the laying of the hands [on the head] of an individual sacrifice is written (Leviticus 3:2): “He shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering [and slaughter it at the entrance of the Tent of Meeting].”
היורש סומך – if his father had offered a freewill offering with a sacrifice of a burnt offering or a peace-offering and died, his son places his hands upon it.
ומביא נסכים – of he sacrifice.
וממיר – if he made a substitution of another animal, his exchange takes effect upon it and both of them are holy, it is as if his father substituted it.

Mishnah 8

חוץ מחרש שוטה וקטן – because they lack knowledge.
סומא – as it is written regarding the bull for an unwitting communal sin (Leviticus 4:15): “The elders of the community shall lay their hands [upon the head of the bull],” and they are the Great Sanhedrin, but in the Sanhedrin there was not among them anyone who was blind, as it is proved in Tractate Sanhedrin [36b], and the same law applies for the rest of the laying of the hands that a blind person is not able is not able to lay his hands [upon the head of the bull].
ונכרי – as it is written (Leviticus 1:2): “Speak to the Israelite people,” the Israelite people lay their hands, but the heathens do not lay their hands [upon the head of a sacrifice].
והעבד והשליח – as it is written (Leviticus 1:4): “He shall lay his hand [upon the head of the burnt offering, that it may be acceptable in his behalf], but not the hand of his servant and not the hand of his agent.
והאשה – the children (i.e., male) of Israel lay their hands [upon the head of the sacrifice], but the daughters of Israel do not lay their hands [upon the head of the sacrifice].
וסמיכה שיירי מצוה – that it is not indispensable for atonement, but however, Scripture considers it for him as if he did not attain expiation.
בשתי ידים – as it is written concerning the scapegoat (Leviticus 16:21): “Aaron shall lay both his hands [upon the head of the live goat],” and this is an analogy for all the laying of the hands that it shall be with both (i.e., the two) hands.
ובמקום שסומכים שוחטים – that if he lay his hands [upon the head of the sacrifice] outside of the Temple courtyard and he returns and lays his hands in the Temple courtyard in the place of the ritual slaughter.
ותיכף לסמיכה שחיטה – as it is written (Leviticus 1:4-5): “He shall lay his hand upon the head of the burnt offering….the bull shall be slaughtered before the LORD.”

Mishnah 9

שאחד מניף לכל החברים – that associated together to make one freewill sacrifice. For all of he the freewill sacrifices one can bring in partnerships, and one waves on behalf of everyone, but all of them together are not able to wave for that would be an interposition/obstruction between the hand of this one and the sacrifice. But the Kohen places his hand underneath the owners and waves and hand of the owners would be an obstruction/interposition, it does not matter to us, for the essence of the waving is by the owners.
בקרבנות היחיד – as for example, the breast and the thigh of peace-offerings.
ובקרבנות צבור – the lambs of Atzeret/Shavuot which require waving while alive and when slaughtered.
בדבר שיש בו רוח חיים – the sacrifice of an animal.
ובדבר שאין בו רוח חיים – as for example, the bread of thanksgiving offerings and the Nazirite offering.

Chapter 10



Mishnah 1

רבי ישמעאל אומר העומר היה בא בשבת – when the sixteenth of Nisan occurs on the Sabbath, the Omer supersedes the Sabbath, for any sacrifice whose time is fixed supersedes the Sabbath and ritual impurity. The Omer comes from three Seah, that they would reap three Seah of barley and wave it in a sieve until he places them upon on choice Issaron/tenth.

בשלשה בני אדם ובשלש קופות ובשלש מגלות – to publicize the matter that the reaping of the Omer occurs on the aftermath of the fifteenth day of Nisan. Because the Sadducees would say that the Omer does not come other than on Sunday (i.e., the first day of the week).

Mishnah 2

מצות העומר לבוא מן הקרוב – from a place that is close to Jerusalem because they do forego the occasion for performing a religious commandment, therefore, when they go out from Jerusalem to search for the Omer, that grain that he finds first he takes it.
לא ביכר – it didn’t ripen all of the way.
מעשה שבא מגגות צריפין ועין סוכר – greatly distant from Jerusalem, because the ravaging [Roman] troos destroyed all the grain that was surrounding Jerusalem.

Mishnah 3

כריכות – they wrap up and tie the tops of the spikes/ears of corn as large as a fist.
מתכנסות לשם – at the conclusion of the Holy Day when they cut it.
כדי נקצר בעסק גדול – with the great sound. That the Sadducees will know that the conclusion of the first Holy Day [of Passover] they reap it, because they did not admit to this, as will be seen further on.
אמר להן – the reaper , to the people of the villages that are standing upon him: Did the sun set? And they respond to him: “Yes.”
מגל זה – meaning to say, shall I reap the grain with this scythe?
קופה זו – shall I put the grain into this basket?
שבת זו – shall I reap on this Sabbath? And they said to him: “Yes.”
שלש פעמים – he asks them about each and every matter.
וכל כך – that he would ask. Why?
מפני הצדוקים והביתוסים שהיו אומרים אין קצירת העומר במוצאי יום טוב – other than on Saturday night (i.e., after the Sabbath day), as it is written (Leviticus 23:15): “[And from the day on which you bring the sheaf of elevation offering -] the day after the sabbath – you shall count off [seven weeks].” From the first day after the Sabbath of creation is implied, and it is a tradition in our hands that from the day after the sabbath which is the conclusion of the first Holy Day of Passover, whether it occurs on a weekday or whether it occurs on a Sabbath. And similarly, we found in the Book of Joshua (5:11): “On the day after the Passover offering, on that very day, they ate of the produce of the country, unleavened bread and parched grain,” for behold it states in the Torah (Leviticus 23:14): “Until that very day, [until you have brought the offering of your God], you shall eat no bread or parched grain or fresh ears,” but from after that it held in suspense the permission of the new grain on the aftermath [of the first day] of Passover, the matter was clear that the aftermath of [the first day of] Passover is what permits the new grain and on it, they reap the Omer whether the first Holy Day of Passover occurs on a weekday or whether it occurs on the Sabbath. And therefore, the reapers raise their voices in order that the Boethusians will hear it and to remove it (i.e., the practice of waiting until the Saturday night after the holiday) from their hearts. And they reap the Omer at night and not during the day, as it is written (Leviticus 23:15): “And from the day on which you bring the sheaf of elevation offering – the day after the sabbath – you shall count off seven weeks. They must be complete,” and it is impossible to be “complete” unless one begins to count from the beginning of the nighttime, for the nighttime is the beginning of the day, and behold it states (Deuteronomy 16:9): “start to count the seven weeks when the sickle is first put to the standing grain,” so we see that the reaping is at night at the time when they begin to count.

Mishnah 4

מהבהבין אותו באור (they parch it in fire) – while it is still in the ears, in order to fulfill through it the Mitzvah of parched ears , as it is written (Leviticus 2:14): “[If you bring a grain offering of first fruits to the LORD,] you shall bring near ears parched with fire, and Scripture is speaking of the meal-offering of the Omer.
וחכמים אומרים – first they knock upon the ears [to thresh the grain out], and not in the manner of dry grain that they beat it with a staff, but rather with moist reeds.
ובקליחות – with stalks of cabbage, in order that it would not be crushed.
נתנוהו לאבוב – for the Rabbis hold that if they parch it with actual fire, it is not called “parched ears,” but rather through another thing, which is through a utensil, that they place it in the iron tube for roasting grain, and this is a perforated utensil of copper/bronze that sellers of parched ears parch it. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
ברחיים של גרוסות (grist grinders’ mills) – that they don’t mill/grind it thin, but rather thick, for if they grind it well, the coarse bran flour of the husks will pass through in the winnow with the choice flour. And [the word] גרוסות/grist is the language of a dish of grounded beans and as such it is called grist of early ripened and tender barley (see Tractate Menahot 68b).
וחייב בחלה – that the obligation [to separate] Hallah which is the rolling of this started dough that is in the hand of the lay person/commoner after it is redeemed.
ופטור מן המעשרות – that its being evenly shaped is in the hands of that which is dedicated to Temple property, and the giving of a pile of grain an even shape that is dedicated to Temple property is exempt from the tithes.
ר"ע מחייב – this flour that remains from the Issaron of the Omer.
בחלה ובמעשרות – because they did not give money to consecrated property, therefore, the giving of a pile of grain an even shape is not consecrated property , for it is not sacred. But the Halakah is not according to Rabbi Akiva.
בא לו לעשרון – he puts in its oil first and its frankincense prior to giving the choice flour.
יצק ובלל – after putting in the choice flour in the manner of all the meal-offerings that they put oil into a utensil firs and afterwards put in the choice flour and he goes back and pours upon it oil and mingles it.
הניף והגיש – the meal-offering of the Omer requires waving and bringing it near, as we stated in [Tractate Menahot] Chapter [Five], “All the Meal-Offerings” [Mishnah 6].

Mishnah 5

שלא ברצון חכמים – that he decreed that lest one eats from the new crop (i.e., grain that ripened before Passover. The Torah prohibits harvesting and eating this produce until after the Omer offering on the 16th of Nisan) when they reap prior to offering up the Omer sacrifice, and this is already certain flour that has been harvested prior to the Omer.
ר' יהודה אומר ברצון חכמים – that they did not decree lest he eats when he harvests/reaps. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.
והרחוקים – that do not know if the Omer was yet offered.
מותרים מחצו היום ולהלן – as its reason will be taught further on.
שיהא יום הנף – the sixteenth of Nisan that on it they would wave the Omer (see also Tractate Rosh Hashanah, Chapter Four, Mishnah Three and also Tractate Sukkah, Chapter 3, Mishnah 12).
כולו אסור – to eat on it the new crop.
אמר ר' יהודה – to the Tanna of our Mishnah, for Rabban Yohanan [ben Zakkai] ordained/established the practice.
והלא מן התורה אסור – at the time [of the Torah], when the Temple didn’t exist. For two Biblical verses are written, one verse states (Leviticus 23:14): “Until that very day/עד עצם היום הזה, [until you have brought the offering of your God, you shall eat no bread or parched grain or fresh ears,” that it implies that the essence of [that] entire day it is prohibited, up to and including, and the other verse states (Leviticus 23:14): “until you have brought the offering of your God,” that implies that after [bringing] the sacrifice of the Omer it is permitted. How so? Here (i.e., in the second part of the verse just quoted), at the time when the Temple exists; there (i.e., the first part of the verse), at the time when the Temple does not exist. Hence, we see that at the time when the Temple does not exist, the Omer is not offered, it is that the day of waving is completely forbidden (and see the parallel Mishnah mentioned above from Tractate Rosh Hashanah, Chapter 4, Mishnah 3). But the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 68b) responds that what is taught in the Mishnah: “Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai ordained that the day of waving [of the Omer, the Second Day of Passover] should be wholly prohibited [in respect to new produce],” you should not say, that he ordained, but rather that he expounded and ordained, that is to say, he expounded on these Biblical verses in public and informed them that this is the law, that the day of waving [of the Omer] should be wholly prohibited from the Torah from when the Temple was destroyed. But there are those who expound upon the Gemara (see also Tractate Menahot 68a), that the new crop is not prohibited from the Torah on the sixteenth day of Nisan at the time when there is no Temple but rather only until the eastern horizon is broken through/filled with light in the morning of the sixteenth day [of Nisan], as it is written (Leviticus 23:14): “Until that very day,” up to, but not including, and Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai ordained that the day of waving would be wholly prohibited, because speedily the Temple should be rebuilt and people would say last year, did we not consume it (i.e., the new crop) from when the eastern horizon is broken through/filled with light, that now also we will eat, but they did not known that at the time of the Temple (i.e., when it existed), it was forbidden to eat new crops until the Omer was offered, as it is written (Leviticus 23:14): “until you have brought the offering of your God. And this we explained in the chapter [of Tractate Sukkah], “The Stolen Lulav” [Chapter 3, Mishnah 12].

Mishnah 6

העומר היה מתיר במדינה – to eat the new crop in all places.
ושתי הלחם במקדש – that prior to [bringing of] the two loaves, they don’t bring a meal-offering from the new grain, as it is written in regard to the two loaves (Numbers 28:26): “[On the day of first fruits, your Feast of Weeks,] when you bring an offering of new grain [to the LORD,” that it will be new for all of he meal-offerings.
ומנחת בהמה – the meal-offering of libations of the cattle.
ואם הביא – prior to the [offering of the] Omer sacrifice.
פסול – for the new crop was not permitted by implication even with regard to the lay person/commoner. But prior to the [sacrifice of] the two loaves, he should not bring.
ואם ההביא כשר – for it was already permitted by implication with regard to the lay person/commoner.

Mishnah 7

ומצטרפין זה עם זה – to complete the measure of the started dough that is liable for [separating out] Hallah [for the Kohen] (see Tractate Hallah, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1 and Chapter 2, Mishnah 6). But they don’t require all of them together for one type mixed with another do not combine, but rather the wheat combines with he spelt alone because they are a species of wheat (see Tractate Pesahim 35a), but the barley combines with all except for the wheat. And even though that spelt is a kind of wheat, it is not exactly the special of wheat, but rather a type of barley and even a type of wheat, and they combine with the wheat and the barley. But however, in the Jerusalem Talmud it implies that if they were kneaded together, they combine, even one type mixed with another type. But if they were not kneaded together, but rather afterwards the started dough would become affixed to each other, one type with a similar type combine, but [one type] mixed with another type do not combine.
ואסורים בחדש – as it is written (Leviticus 23:14): “Until that very day, until you have brought the offering of your God, you shall eat no bread or parched grain or fresh ears,” and we learn/derive [through an analogy of] "לחם"\"לחם" – from Passover. Just as there, from the five species, also here from the five species.
ומלקצור מלפני הפסח – that it is forbidden to harvest from the five species prior to the harvesting of the Omer. It is written with regard to the Omer (Leviticus 23:10): “[you shall bring] the first sheaf of your harvest to the priest,” that the beginning of all that is harvest, it comes (i.e., it is derived) [as an a fortiori/Kal VaHomer] "ראשית"\"ראשית" from Hallah, it is written there (Numbers 15:20): “as the first yield of our baking,” and it is written here (Leviticus 23:10): “[you shall bring] the first sheaf of your harvest to the priest,” just as there it is from the five species, so here too it is from the five species.
ואם השרישו – one of these five species prior to the reaping of the Omer.
העומר מתירן – and it is permitted to harvest them after the harvesting of the Omer. As it is written (Exodus 23:16): “[and the Feast of the Harvest, of the first fruits of your work,] of what you sow in the field,” from the time that it is sown and takes root in the field.
ואם לאו – they did not take root other than after the reaping of the Omer.
אסורים שיבוא העומר הבא – of the coming year.

Mishnah 8

קוצרים בית השלחים שבעמקים – that their grain is bad and we don’t bring the Omer from there. And it is taught in a Baraitha (Tractate Menahot 71a), one verse states (Leviticus 23:10): “and you repeat its harvest and you shall bring the… sheaf,” that implies that you are able to reap prior to bring the Omer, and another verse (ibid.,) states: “the first sheaf of your harvest,” which implies that it will be the first of all the reaping, how is this possible? From a place that you are able to bring the Omer you do not reap prior to the Omer, [and] from a place that you cannot bring, as for example, the dry arid land in need of irrigation and the valleys where they don’t bring Omer from them because they are poor [quality], one reaps prior to [bringing] the Omer.
אבל לא גודשין – to make a heap. For whatever It is possible to change, we change.
אנשי יריחו – they had dry, arid lands requiring irrigation.
קוצר שחת – it is permissible to reap corn in its earliest stage [used instead of grass] prior to [the reaping of] the Omer and feed it to his cattle.
אימתי בזמן שהתחיל – to reap it for the needs of his cattle until it did not bring up the final third of the completion of its ripening, he reaps even after it brought up the third.
ר' שמעון אומר אף יקצור ויאכיל – he will begin to reap and feed it to his cattle when it brings forth a third [of its full growth], and all of the corn in its earliest stage [used instead of grass] is not reaping. But the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda who comes to explain the words of the first Tanna/teacher.

Mishnah 9

קוצרים – prior to the Omer.
מפני בנטיעות – that they will lose them. Because that grain is not appropriate for the Omer, as we stated in the chapter “All of the Sacrifices/כל הקרבנות” (Tractate Menahot, Chapter 8, Mishnah 2), we do not bring either from an arid irrigated field nor from a field containing at least three tees within a distance of a Seah, and above we stated (quoting from Tractate Menahot 71a), that from a place that you don’t bring [the Omer] you reap. Another explanation: “Because of the seedlings/מפני הנטיעות,” because of mixed seeds, because sometimes a person sows grain and there are no seedlings there, and after a time seedlings rise up there on their own between them, and one must reap he seeds because of mixed seeds/Kilyaim.
מפני בית האבל – that they lack the free space rto sit and to recite the blessing of comfort that we say in the House of Mourning.
ומפני בית המדרש – for there is no place for the students to sit. And the reason of all of these, is because reaping is a Commandment, and the Scriptural verse states (Leviticus 23:10): “the first sheaf of your harvest,” that the Omer will be the fist of your optional harvest and not the first of the command of reaping.
כריכות – bound large sheaves.
צבתים – bundles without tying. Another interpretation: bundles of bound large sheaves, heaps are small bundles
מן הקמח – that he would reap for its sake.
לא מצא – that everything was already reaped.
מן הלח – as it is written (Leviticus 23:14): “You shall eat no [bread or parched grain] or fresh ears,” that it is soft and brittle (see Tractate Menahot 66b).
לקצור בלילה – that we derived at the beginning of the chapter (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 10, Mishnah 3), as it is written (Deuteronomy 16:9): “when the sickle is first put to the standing grain,” from the time that you count you reap, for the counting must be at night, as it is written (Leviticus 23:15): “you shall count off seven weeks. They must be complete.” (see also Tractate Megillah, Chapter 2, Mishnah 6).

Chapter 11



Mishnah 1

שתי הלחם. לחם הפנים נילוש אחת אחת – as it is written concerning it (Leviticus 24:5): “[You shall take choice flour and bake of it twelve loaves,] two-tenths of a measure for each loaf,” which teaches that they are kneaded one by one. And from where [do we learn] that their baking is two at a time? The inference teaches us (Leviticus 24:6): “Place them/ושמת אותם [on the pure table before the LORD in two rows, six to a row].” The first placement that you do from them, that is in the oven, will be in the [plural] language of “them/אותם”, that implies that he would place two in two molds/frames together in the oven. It is possible that even the two loaves are like this, as the inference teaches us (ibid.,): “Place them,” that you should have said, “place them” [regarding the shewbread/לחם הפנים ], what does the inference each us – those – you place two by two in the oven, but you do not place the two loaves – two by two, but rather one at a time.
ובטפוס – like דפוס/mold or frame – PURMA in the foreign tongue, like a sort of box that you take its cover and its two walls one opposite the other, so also the bread, you would have two walls and wide rims at the bottom of the vessel and you prepare the dough within the mold that it is made like a kind of mold.
וכשהוא רודה –[removes/detaches bread from where it sticks] from the oven.
נותנן בדפוס. כדי שלא יתקלקלו – and break. It is found that there are three molds: one when it is dough and one when it was in the oven when it is baking, and one when he detaches bread from where it sticks from the oven and places it in a mold in order that it not be spoiled (see Tractate Menahot 94a).

Mishnah 2

לישתן ועריכתן בחוץ ואפייתן בפנים – but the reason for this matter is not explained in the Gemara, why their kneading and their rolling is outside [the Temple courtyard] but their baking is inside [the Temple courtyard].
ואינן דוחות את השבת – their baking.
וכשרות בבית פאגי – Maimonides states that it is a place close to the Temple Mount from outside (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 7, Mishnah 3 – as a special place for the baking of meal-offerings) that they would bake the meal-offerings thee. From the language of (Daniel 1:12-13): “[Please test your servants for ten days, giving us legumes to eat and water to drink. Then compare our appearance with that of the youths] who eat of the king’s food, [and do with your servants as you see fit].” But the Halakha is onot other than according to the words of the first Tanna/teacher.

Mishnah 3

חביתי כהן גדול לישתן ועריכתן בפנים – according to the words of everyone. For that one-half Issaron that they divide its Issaron of the High Priest who is anointed and sanctified and sanctifies the meal offering (see also Tractate Menahot, Chapter 4, Mishnah 5 and Chapter 6, Mishnah 5).
ודוחות את השבת – because it is impossible to perform its kneading and its rolling and its baking from the day before, for since it is sanctified in a vessel, it becomes defiled staying overnight [This principle is also taught in Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 19, Mishnah 1 with regard to ritual circumcision and in Tractate Pesahim, Chapter 6, Mishnah 2 with regard to the Passover offering].

Mishnah 4

יש בהן מעשה כלי בפנים – in their work which is performed with them inside [the Temple courtyard] requires a [consecrated] utensil.. To exclude on top of a board. But their work (i.e., preparation) is done outside [the Temple courtyard], as for example the kneading and rolling of the shewbread, which does not require a [consecrated] utensil.
וקרנותיה – on which he fastens/pastes dough for each board, like horns. And the length of each horn/projection extends four fingers.
רבי יהודה אומר שלא תטעה – whether the two loaves to the shewbread, whether in the measurement of the length and the width, or whether in the measurement of the horns/projections. The two loaves, its length is seven [handbreadths] and its width is four [handbreadths] and its horns/projections are four finger lengths. And your sign/pneumonic is זד"ד/seven, four, four. The shewbread, its length is ten [handbreadths] and its width is five [handbreadths] and its horns/projections is seven fingers length. And your symbol/pneumonic is יה"ז/ten, five and seven. And the methodology of Rabbi Yehuda is to give signs/pneumonic like דצ"ך עד"ש באח"ב (i.e., the abbreviations for the Ten Plagues found in the Passover Haggadah).
שיהא לו פנים – walls [that it would have corners/angles] and these are the horns.

Mishnah 5

ארכו עשרה ורחבו חמשה – as it is written (Exodus 25:23): “[You shall make a table of acacia wood.] two cubits long, one cubit wide.” Rabbi Yehuda according to his reasoning that he stated of utensils that are five handbreadths [in width] (see also Tractate Kelim, Chapter 17, Mishnah 10).
נותן ארכו (one sets it lengthwise against the breadth of the table) – of the showbread corresponding to the width of the table.
וכופל – the bread, two-and-one-half handbreadths above at its height from here and there, and they are its horns/corners. But they were found equally bent at the rim of the table.
ונמצא ארכו ממלא רחבו של השלחן – and its width holds/contains half of the length of the table, and when he would set up another near it, it is found that the entire table is full.
ארכו שנים עשר – Rabbi Meir, according to his reasoning who stated that each cubit is six handbreadths, except for the Golden Altar and the horn of the outer altar and the gallery around the altar for the priest to walk on and the base of the altar. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Meir.
לחם הפנים ארכו עשרה – in this Rabbi Meir agrees (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 11, Mishnah 4).
וטפחיים ריוח באמצע – between the two rows [of bread in the center]. For the width of the bread is not other than five [handbreadths], the two rows [of bread] sustain the ten handbreadths of the table to its length, subtract the two handbreadths of space between each row [of bread], so that the wind blows on them so that they don’t grow moldy.
אבא שאול אומר שם – in that space between each row/pile they place the dishes/vessels.
והלא כבר נאמר ונתת על המערכת – and on, actually by implication.
ועליו מטה מנשה – and that is near to it. Here also on nearby. And the Halakha is according to Abba Shaul.

Mishnah 6

מפוצלין – to give the heads of the branches the staves between the cakes of the shewbread heads shaped into forked branches [at the top], that as the number of the staves, so too the number of the forked branches.
ארבעה עשר לסדר זה – six loaves that were in the order of the arrangement on the pile of wood on the altar in the Temple. For four of them, each of them had three branches, there were twelve staves, but for the uppermost it only needed two because there is no burden upon it, hence [there are] fourteen. The lowest loaf did not need anything, because it was placed immediately on the golden table (see Tractate Menahot 97a).
לא סדור קנים – in a new pile of wood on the altar.
לא נטילתן – from the old [pile] supersedes the Sabbath.
נכנס מערב שבת ושומטן – from between each and every loaf, and he places them on the length of the table. And on the next day, he arranges the bread, and on Saturday night (i.e., after the Sabbath), he places the reeds between each bread according to the statute.
ארכן לארכו של הבית – from east to west they would be placed by their length, except for the Ark whose length is according to the width of the Temple, for the staves/poles that were in the Ark would protrude and press/squeeze the curtain and they are similar a woman’s two breasts, as it states (I Kings 8:8): “The poles projected so that the ends of the poles were visible in the sanctuary in front of the Shrine,” and the poles were placed according to the width of the Ark, for had they been according to the length of the Ark, there would not have been each pole other than the measurement of the width of the Ark which is a one-and-one-half cubits, and two men carry the Ark with two poles, two from one side and two from the other, and they would not be able to enter between each pole, it certainly was placed in their width, and they wee from east to west that they would press the curtain, so it is found that the Ark was according to the width of the Temple.

Mishnah 7

על פתח הבית – next to the door of the Sanctuary at their entrance, but they would not place [the tables] there other than to demonstrate that we ascend in holiness, that now that we place on one of marble and immediately carry them to the Sanctuary and set them up (i.e., the shewbread) on one (i.e., a table) of gold of Moses.
ועל של זהב ביציאתו – until they will be offered as incense in dishes/censors as it is taught further on in our Mishnah.
המכניסים עומדים בצפון – that this is more preferable that those who arrange the Divine service will be iin the north.
אלו מושכין (draw out) – and until they don’t lift them (i.e., the old ones) from the table, these others place [the new ones] down.
אפילו אלו נוטלין – and these themselves lay them down after they took them [off].
אף זו היתה תמיד – for Rabbi Yossi holds that it is not “perpetual” other than that the table should not be kept overnight without bread (i.e., the shewbread).
והחלות מתחלקות לכהנים – the departing division of duty of the priests divides them up with the entering division of duty of the priests.
חל יום הכיפורים להיות בשבת – for the law of the shewbread is to consume it on that Sabbath when they take it from upon the table, but now, they are unable to consume it because of the fast [of Yom Kippur].

השעיר – of the Musaf/Additional [Service] sacrifice which is a sin-offering and it is consumed by the priests.
לנאכל לערב – on Friday night, for its time is during the day and that night until midnight. And even though they are not able to cook it on the Sabbath nor on Yom Kippur.
הבבליים – those Kohanim who came up from Babylonia. But the Gemara (Tractate Menahot 100a) explains that they were not Babylonians but rather that they were Alexandrians, and on account that the Sages in the Land of Israel hate the Babylonians, they called the Alexandrians who performed this act of voracity (i.e., in eating the sin-offering of Yom Kippur raw) with the Babylonians.
היו אוכלין אותו חי – when Yom Kippur fell on Friday.
מפני דעתן יפה – they did not detest eating the meat when it was raw.

Mishnah 8

ואת הבזיכים לאחר השבת – and their law was to set them (i.e., the dishes of frankincense) on the Sabbath at the time of the arranging of the bread.
והקטיר את הבזיכים בשבת פסולה – for it was lacking time (i.e., its time to be offered had not yet arrived, for it was not on the table other than for six days, but here, it is impossible to fix it and to say, let him leave it until the next Sabbath, for since the bread was set out/arranged according to its law on the Sabbath, the table was sanctified and furthermore, she is not able to delay it other until the first Sabbath where it is invalidated by staying [there] overnight.
ואין חייבין עליהם משום פגול – if he offered them up as incense on condition to eat the bread on the morrow it is not an offering disqualified by improper intention, for he did not offer that which is permitted according to its commandment.
ולא משום נותר – for no remnant occurs on the [shew]bread, for it is not worthy of consumption.
וטמא – he who eats it in a state of bodily ritual impurity is not liable for extirpation, for we state in the chapter of “Taking a Handful of the Meal Offering/ הקומץ את המנחה” (Tractate Menahot 25b) that the remnant for those who are ritually pure, they are liable for it because of ritual defilement, but this was not left over ever for those who are ritually pure, for with the dishes [of frankincense, they would permit his, but they were not offered according to their law.
יניחנו לשבת הבאה – and it would stand for two weeks on the table, for since it was not set down/arranged on Shabbat, the table is not sanctified until Shabbat arrives, and from that Shabbat he can have it them stay there for seven days.
שאפילו היה על שלחן ימים רבים – prior to the Sabbath.
אין בכך – [there is] nothing [regarding it] for the table does not sanctify it until the Sabbath, therefore it is not invalidated through staying over after the Sabbath.

Mishnah 9

אין פחות משנים – from two days from when they were baked.
נאכל לשלשה – that he baked them on Friday/the Eve of the Sabbath, because their baking does not supersede neither the Sabbath nor a Festival.
לתשעה – on the second Sabbath, which is nine [days] from its being baked.
לעשרה – that they wee baked on a Thursday.
שני ימים טובים של ראש השנה – prior to Shabbat. It was baked on Wednesday and consumed on the second Sabbath, that is eleven [days], but if you say that they are twelve days, for that Sabbath is Yom Kippur, and the bread is not eaten until Saturday night. This is not difficult = for regarding the matter of consuming the Holy Things, the night follows after the day that passed, therefore, it is called eleven [days].
ואינו דוחה לא את השבת ולא את יום טוב – because they don’t bake or cook on the Festival other than what one eats on that day alone.
רבן שמעון בן גמליאל אומר וכו' – but the Halakha is not according to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel.

Chapter 12



Mishnah 1

המנחות והנכסים. עד שלא קדשו בכלי – they are not sanctified as an object which is consecrated as such (i.e., irredeemable), but rather that which is consecrated for its value (i.e., redeemable), that one must redeem them and the monies are holy. And especially, when they were impure, they have redemption, before one has consecrated them in a [consecrated] utensil, but if they were defiled even though they had not been consecrated in a [consecrated] utensil, we don’t redeem them.
העופות והעצים והלבונה וכלי שרת שנטמאו אין להם פדיון – for redemption that is not stated with an object which is consecrated as such (i.e., irredeemable) other than with a animal having a blemish, as it is written (Leviticus 27:11-12): “If [the vow concerns] any impure animal that may not be brought as an offering to the LORD…and the priest shall assess it.” And the Scriptural verse is speaking about animals with blemishes that had been redeemed, for if it was an actual impure animal, when it (i.e., the Biblical verse) states (Leviticus 27:27): “But if it is of impure animals, it may be ransomed as its assessment, [with one-fifth added; if it is not redeemed, it shall be sold at its assessment],” behold, it is stated regarding an impure animal, and our Mishnah comes to inform us that even though we find with something holy an object which is consecrated as such (i.e., irredeemable) and a blemish befell it we redeem it, whereas the birds and the wood and the frankincense and the utensils of service that are sanctified as objects consecrated as such (i.e., irredeemable) and are made impure, we don’t redeem them.

Mishnah 2

מה שהביא הביא (see also Tractate Menahot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 8) – for we state that it was not for the purpose of his vow that the brought, but rather It is a different free-will offering/donation.
זו להביא במחבת – for there was an Issaron/one-tenth of an Ephah of choice four placed before him, and he said, [Lo, I pledge myself to bring this choice flour as a meal-offering prepared] in a pan/frying pan, etc.
הרי זו פסולה – for he appointed it for the utensil that he mentioned and he is not able to change it to t
אלו להביא בכלי אחד – these that were placed/lying before him.
הרי אלו פסולים – for where he made a vow for one utensil and brought in two utensils, he sets aside/dedicates from it two handfuls, but he did not vow other than one handful. And further, that the meal -offering is lacking in each and every utensil. But where he vowed for two utensils, but brought [only] for one utensil, it would be an extra meal-offering but where he diminished/reduced the handfuls, for he sifted/selected for it two handfuls, but only took one handful.
אמרו לו בכלי אחד נדרת – but he was not troubled by their words and he offered it in two utensils, it is invalid, but even though that he did not state that these would be brought in one utensil. Because that now, one cannot say that I have brought another free-will offering, for since they said to him that he made a votive offering in one utensil, he could have said to them: “I because of another vow bring this.”
כשתי מנחות שנתערבו – for we said in the chapter of the “The One Who Takes a Handful”/הקומץ (Chapter 3, Mishnah 3 of Tractate Menahot)that if he is able to take a handful from this one on its own and from that one on its own, they are kosher/fit, but if not they are invalid. But that which is taught above [in our Mishnah]: “these which are to be brought in two utensils but he brought them in one utensil, they are invalid,” speaks, as for example, that he was not able to take a handful from each one of them on its own.

Mishnah 3

הרי עלי מנחה מן השעורים יביא מן החטים – for the free-will offerings of meal offerings do not come other than from wheat, and as for example that he said, “Had I known that we don’t bring a meal-offering from barley, I would not have made a votive offering other than from wheat.” But if he said, “I would not vow anything,” he is not liable for anything.
יביא סלת – as it is written (Leviticus 2:1): “[When a person presents an offering of grain to the LORD,] his offering shall be of choice flour.”
ר' שמעון פוטר – Rabbi Shimon holds that a person is made responsible for the his concluding words, for since he concluded his words not in accordance with the law of the meal-offering, he is not liable for anything. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon (see Talmud Menahot 103b).

Mishnah 4

שמן צבור מביאים וכו' – three Esronim (i.e., three-tenths of an Omer) for a bull, for thirteen bulls they are thirty-nine Esronim, and an Issaron (i.e., one-tenth of an Omer) for a lamb; for fourteen lambs they are fourteen Esronim, and two Esronim; for two rams they are four Esronim, that is fifty seven, and for the two daily offerings/Tamidim, two, and for the two lambs for the Musaf/additional offering for Shabbat is two, this is sixty one. But Rabbi Shimon said to them: But were all of them for that self-same day in one utensil, but weren’t these for bulls and these for rams and lambs, for if he mixed/combined them, he invalidated them, for the meal-offering of bulls – their mixture was thick, two LOG (i.e., a LOG equals the volume of six eggs bulk) for an Issaron, one-half of a Hin for thee Esronim, but for the meal offering of lambs, their mixture was thin, one-quarter of a Hin for an Issaron, which is three LOG, and they absorb one from another , and it is found that this one is less and that one has more. But for what reason does an individual not bring sixty-one Esronim in one utensil, for up to sixty, one can thoroughly mix in one LOG. But this Tanna/teacher holds like Rabbi Eliezer ben Yaakov who stated in the chapter [nine, Mishnah three of Tractate Menahot] “Two Measures”/שתי מדות – even a meal offering of sixty Esronim, it does not have any ought one Log. But even though it was all mixed, since it was appropriate to be mixed, the mixing does not make it indispensable., for such we hold that everything wherever from the proportions and properties of the mixture a perfect fusion is possible, the real act of mixing thoroughly is not indispensable (see Talmud Hullin 83b), but that which is not appropriate for a thorough mixture, the thorough mixture makes it indispensable.
וששים ואחד אין נבללים – in astonishment!
קרטוב (1/64th of a LOG or 3/32 of an egg-bulk) – a fourth of a fourth of a LOG.
אין מתנדבים לוג – wine for libations. For we have not found a meal-offering of libations of one LOG and not of two nor of five [of wine].
אבל מתנדבים ג' לוגים – that are appropriate for a lamb. And four [LOG] that are appropriate for a ram. And six LOG which is one-half of Hin that are appropriate for a bull. But from six [LOG] and above, they volunteer as a free-will offering, for seven are appropriate for three of them for a lamb and four for a ram, and eight are appropriate for two rams, and nine are appropriate for a lamb and a bull, ten are appropriate for a ram and a bull, eleven are appropriate for two rams and a lamb. And similarly throughout.

Mishnah 5

מתנדבים יין – without choice flour and oil, and we offer it as a libation for sixty on its own.
ואין מתנדבים שמן – without choice flour and wine.
מתנדבין שמן – and he takes a fistful and offers up the handful [of the meal-offering] which is offered up as incense but the remnants are consumed.
שכן הוא קרב חובתו בפני עצמו – with his obligation it is offered on its own. Even though it comes as an obligation with the meal offering, it is not indispensable to the meal-offering.
תאמר בשמן כו' – for since we do not find it in it, for it is not in a utensil on its own, now also it is not brought.
אפילו פרידה אחת – one turtle-dove or one pigeon, we make a free-will offering among the two [of them]. And the Halakah is that we make free-will offerings of wine and oil on their own, and we make a free-will offering of a meal-offering of libations, whether the libations of a bull or whether the libations of a ram or a lamb. And all of the sacrifices come as a jointly owned free-will offering, except for the meal-offering, because it is stated regarding it "נפש"/an individual soul, as it is written (Leviticus 2:1): “When a person presents an offering of grain [to the LORD, his offering shall be of choice flour].”

Chapter 13



Mishnah 1

הרי עלי עשרון. פירשתי – I will bring several Esronim but I don’t know how many I stated.
יביא ששים עשרונים – for if he vowed less than this, it does not matter to him, for it teaches [in the Mishnah] and he states: “What that I expressly said will be for my vow, and the rest will be for a free-will offering.” But more than this one does not have to supply, for one meal-offering is not larger than sixty Issarons (see Tractate Menahot, Chapter 12, Mishnah 4).
הרי עלי מנחה – a person who states, “I pledge myself to bring a mere grain-offering.”
יביא איזה שירצה – from the five meal offerings (explained in the Torah: choice flour, in a deep and covered pan, in a pan – without a lid, baked loaves and baked wafers).
מיוחדת – which is called a mere meal/grain-offering, but it does not have a differentiating epithet, for all of the rest of the meal/grain-offerings have a differentiating epithet, the meal offering of the pan-without a lid, the meal-offering of the deep covered pan, the meal-offering that is baked. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Mishnah 2

מנחה מין המנחה – he who says, “I pledge myself to bring a meal-offering,” or a kind of meal-offering.
יביא אחת – from the meal-offerings that are mentioned in the portion (i.e., choice flour, in a deep and covered pan, in a pan -without a lid, baked loaves and/or baked wafers).
מנחות – are upon me [as a pledge to bring] or that he states: “from a kind/species of the meal offerings are upon me,” he would bring two meal-offerings from one kind.
פירשתי – kids of meal-offerings that I would bring, but I don’t know how many kinds they are that I vowed to bring.
מביא חמשתן – a meal-offering of choice flour, a meal-offering in a deep and covered pan, a meal- offering in a pan-without a lid, a meal-offering of that which is baked in an oven and it comes from two kinds – loaves and wafers.
פירשתי מנחה של עשרונים – in one utensil, but I do not know how many Esronim I appointed for it.
יביא ששים עשרון – for more than this he is not able to supply. But if he vowed less than this, if does not matter to us, for he makes a condition and states how many he specified will be for my vow and the rest will be a free-will offering (see also, Mishnah 8 in this chapter).
רבי אומר – since he said “a meal-offering,” that implies one, so we see, he established it in one utensil, but if he would bring sixty in one utensil, perhaps he vowed less than this, it would be an additional meal-offering, for Rabbi holds that the appointment of a portion is substantial, therefore, he should bring sixty meal-offerings from one until sixty, one of one Isaron, and one of two {Esronim] and one of three [Esronim] and one of four [Esronim] until sixty. That it is found that he brings among them all one thousand eight hundred and thirty Esronim, for certainly vowed one of them, but it is not a free-will offering. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi [Judah the Prince].

Mishnah 3

לא יפחות משני זגירין – two large logs, for the least of wood is two.
והמעלה את הקומץ בחוץ חייב – [is liable for] extirpation, for it is an offering on the altar. But with this general rule it is also offering up a handful inside for the burning on the altar is valid; therefore, five handfuls are considered and not any more, for the person who offers up a handful inside is not considered as a sixth handful.
ושני בזיכים – of shewbread.

Mishnah 4

לא יפחות מדינר זהב – and he that would state a gold coin. For if not, perhaps he states a piece of gold bar, that is a piece of gold.
נחושת לא יפחות ממעה כסף – that he should bring copper that is worth a Maah of silver (i.e., a Maah is a small silver coin worth thirty-two peruta or one-sixth of a dinar = the Biblical gerah).
פירשתי – such and such [an amount of] gold.
ואיני יודע כמה פירשתי – he should bring so much until that he would himself would know that he never intended for so much.

Mishnah 5

הרי עלי יין – for libations.
לא יפחות משלשה לוגין – for they are the least that are of the libations. A quarter of a Hin for a lamb are three Logs, for a Hin is twelve LOG.
שמן לא יפחות מלוג – that the least that is for a meal/grain-offering is an Issaron of choice flour, and it requires a LOG of oil.
רבי אומר שלשה לוגין – like the least that is in the meal/grain-offering is an Issaron for a lamb mixed with a quarter of Hin of oil. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi [Judah the Prince].
כיום מרובה – like the First Day of the Festival of the Sukkot holiday when it falls on the Sabbath. For on that day, there is an abundance of libations for the obligatory sacrifices of the day from the rest of the days of the year. For there were thirteen bulls and fourteen lambs and four additional sacrifices – two for the Additional Sacrifices of the Sabbath and two for the Additional sacrifices of the Festival [of Sukkot], and two rams and one goat (see Numbers 29:12-16). And the libations required for all of them one-hundred and forty LOG.

Mishnah 6

הרי עלי עולה יביא כבש. ר' אלעזר בן עזריה אומר או תור או בן יונה – in the place of the first Tanna/teacher (i.e., anonymous teacher), he would not call a mere burnt offering anything other than a burnt offering of cattle, and the least that is of the burnt offering of cattle is a lamb, therefore he would bring a lamb. But in the place of Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah they would call a mere burnt offering also for the burnt offering of birds, therefore, he would bring a turtle dove or a pigeon. And the [one] Master according to his place and the [other] Master according to his place.
יביא פר ועגל – male [bulls and calves] but not females, for a burnt offering is not furnished other than with males. But our Mishnah is [according to] Rabbi [Judah the Prince] who states further on (see the conclusion of Tractate Menahot, Chapter 12, Mishnah 8) that a person who vows a free-will offering of a small animal and he brings a large one has not fulfilled his religious obligation. But the Rabbis dispute him and state that one who vows a free-will offering and he brought a large one has fulfilled his religious obligation, for there is within the general category of that which is numerous that which is small in size. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
פירשתי – one of the sacrifices of cattle.
ואיני יודע מאיזה מהן פירשתי – he should bring from all the kinds of male cattle, large and small, which are a bull, a calf, a ram, a goat, a kid and a lamb.
פירשתי – [I explicitly mentioned] the species. But I don’t know what I mentioned specifically. Whether it is a species of cattle or a species of bird.

Mishnah 7

תודה ושלמים – either a thanksgiving offering or a peace-offering.
יביא כבש – which is the least that is of the thanksgiving and peace-offerings.
יביא פר ופרה – for the thanksgiving offering and/or peace-offering can be furnished by [either] males or females.
ורחל – a female lamb/sheep which is two years old.
גדי – [a kid] which is one year old from the goats.
שעיר – a goat which is two years old.
טלה – a lamb which is one year old.

Mishnah 8

יביא הוא ונכסיו במנה – such is explained its law in the Oral Tradition that the value of a bullock with its libations is a Maneh (i.e., 100 denar).
עגל יביא הוא ונסכיו בחמש – [five] Selas (i.e., one Sela equals four Denars).
אמר הרי עלי שור במנה – he should bring it for a Maneh (i.e., a Maneh equals twenty-five Selas), except for its libations, for such is what they (i.e., the Rabbis) established.
שור במנה הביא שנים במנה לא יצא – for it was established that a bull is with a Maneh.
קטן והביא גדול יצא. רבי אומר לא יצא – because of this, it (i.e., the Mishnah) teaches the dispute of Rabbi [Judah the Prince] and the Rabbis here in the concluding clause, to explain, that the opening clause is not the opinions of all but rather that it is that of Rabbi [Judah the Prince] and not the Sages, and the Halakha is not according to Rabbi [Judah the Prince].

Mishnah 9

ונסתאב – a blemish befell it, for a blemish is called impure, as it is written (Leviticus 27:11-12): “if [the vow concerns] any impure animal that may not be brought as an offering to the LORD, [the animal shall be presented to the priest. And the priest shall assess it whether high or low, whatever assessment is set by the priest shall stand],” and the Biblical verse speaks regarding [animals with] blemishes, as we explained in our chapter above (see the previous Mishnah).
ואם רצה יביא בדמיו שמים – but it is not similar to the first clause where we said that for a bull, one brings a Maneh (i.e., 100 denar) but if he brought two [bulls] for a Maneh, he did not fulfill his religious obligation, for there when he said, “I pledge myself [to bring] an ox for a Maneh [to the value of a Maneh], he is liable until he brings it, but here, with this bull that developed a blemish is different, for since he said I will sacrifice this bull as a burnt offering and it became blemished, his vow is gone, and he is not able to further fulfill it.
רבי אוסר – [Rabbi Judah the Prince forbids it] ab initio. But if he brought it, he has fulfilled his religious obligation. For since that he stated this, he is not liable for them (or property which may be resorted to in the event of non-payment). But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi [Judah the Prince].
הבינוני שבהם הקדש – even the middle-sized one of them is dedicated [to the Temple]. For if he has two, the large one is dedicated. For one who dedicates [to the Temple] dedicates generously, and for something undefined, the best of them is dedicated as it is written (Deuteronomy 12:11): “[then you must bring everything that I command you to the site where the LORD your God will choose to establish His name; your burnt offerings and other sacrifices, your tithes and contributions,] and all the choice votive offerings that you vow to the LORD.” And similarly, if he has three [lambs], we are concerning even for the middle-sized one , for we don’t know upon which of them occurs the dedication, if it is the large one which is done generally, or the middle-sized one which is generous [in comparison to] the small one. Therefore, both of them are forbidden. But however, if he did not make an offering to the altar of any other than one of them, and how do we act that he permits one of them and delays [the offering] of the middle-sized one until a blemish befalls it, and he redeems that one for the largest one. For whichever way you turn, if it is the middle-sized one upon which dedication occurs and not on the large one, indeed a blemish befell it and he redeemed it. But if it was on the large one upon which the dedication fell initially, and it is found that the middle-sized one was not consecrated from the outset.
פירשתי – [I explicitly expressed] which if them but I didn’t know which it is.
או שאמר לי אבא – [my father told me] at the time of his passing, one of my bulls I explicitly expressed for dedication but I don’t know on which of them he told me.
הגדול שבהן הקדש – for where that he stated that I explicitly expressed it there is no doubt that it is the largest one I expressed.

Mishnah 10

בבית חוניו – The Temple that Khonyo, the son of Shimon HaTzaddik built in Alexandria of Egypt. For when Shimon HaTzaddik (see Tractate Avot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 2 – one of the last of the generation of the Great Assembly who stated that the world stands on three “pillars”: Torah, Divine Service and Deeds of Loving Kindness) [was about] to die (see the Baraita in Tractate Menahot 109b), he said to them (i.e., his sons): Khonyo, my son will serve in my place, because he is an expert and familiar with the Divine Service more than Shimei his brother. But Khonyo did not accept upon himself to become the High Priest because Shimei his brother was two and half years older than him. And Shimei was appointed as High Priest in place of his father. Subsequently, Khonyo became jealous of Shimei his brother, he (i.e., Shimei) said to him: “Come and I will teach you the order/arrangement of the Divine Service. He dressed him in a thin, fine linen shirt/undercoat, that women wear upon their flesh and upon it a small, narrow belt/girdle and he placed him near the Altar; he went and said to his brethren the Kohanim: “See what this person vowed and fulfilled to his beloved,” that day when I will be appointed to be High Priest, I will wear your fine linen shirt and I will gird myself with your belt/girdle. His brethren the Priests desired to kill him, he recounted to him the entire event, they wished to kill Khonyo, he (i.e., Khonyo) ran from before them to the house of the King. And yet, everyone who sees him states that this is him, he went to Alexandria of Egypt where there were myriads of Jews and made there a Temple and built an altar and offered upon it in the name of God. And regarding that altar Isaiah prophesied (Isaiah 19:19): “In that day, there shall be an altar to the LORD inside the land of Egypt [and a pillar to the LORD at its border].” And this House (i.e., Temple) stood for close to two hundred years and is called “The House of Khonyo” in his name. And everyone agrees that the sacrifices that they would offer there were not a sacrifice. Therefore, whomever said, “May a burnt-offering sacrifice be upon me” – and he offered it there did not fulfill his vow. 
שאקריבנה בבית חוניו – it was made like one who says : “May a burnt-offering sacrifice be upon me on the condition that I will kill it and not be liable for it, therefore if he offered it in the House of Khonyo, he did not fulfill his vow, but he is liable for extirpation because he slaughters outside [the Temple courtyard], for he called upon it the designation of a burnt-offering.
רבי שמעון אומר אין זו עולה – and behold it is completely unconsecrated, for the designation of consecrated does not occur to it at all when he stated that I will offer it in the House of Khonyo. But the Halalkha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
ואם גלח בבית חוניו לא יצא – but rather, he should return and shave [at the conclusion of his period of Naziriteship] in the Temple in Jerusalem, and there he should bring his sacrifices.
שאגלח בבית חוניו אם גלח בבית חוניו יצא – that this man who took the vow of becoming a Nazirite in order that he could shave in the House of Khonyo, he intended to cause himself suffering, but because he was close to the House of Khonyo and far from the land of Israel, he stated, “If I can [offer it] in the House of Khonyo, I will go to the trouble of doing so. More than that he is not able to cause himself suffering, but the designation of being a Nazirite does not fall upon him but he becomes like a person who took an oath that he would not drink wine until a certain time.
רבי שמעון אומר – He is not a Nazirite at all and is permitted to drink wine. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
ואין צריך לומר לדבר אחר – if they served for idolatry, they would not serve [as priests] any longer in Jerusalem.
והרי הן כבעלי מומין (see Tractate Zevakhim, Chapter 12, Mishnah 1) – that they take their portions and eat Sacred Things [but do not offer sacrifices].