Tosefta Bava Batra
תוספתא בבא בתרא
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Bava Batra



Chapter 1

A person shouldn’t dig a pit close to the pit of his fellow, unless he distances the pit three Tefachim (handbreadths) from the wall of his friend and applies lime to the walls of the pit. Rabbi Yehudah says, with soil that comes away when held, one person can dig his pit on one side while the other digs on the other side as long as they both distance three Tefachim from the border and apply lime to the walls of their pits. A person must distance the launderer’s pool
They distance seeds and the plough and urine three tefachim from the wall. They distance the hand mill stone three from the lower millstone which is four from the upper. And of a donkey’s [millstone], three from the istarbil which is four from the hopper. Rabbi Yehudah says, drive a nail in the earth and rest on it the beam, only if he does not drive [it] into [the property] of his fellow. They distance the oven three tefachim from the belly which is four from the rim. A stove, a tefach. A person should not urinate on the wall of his fellow unless at a distance of three tefachim from stones but against granite it is permitted.
In truth, for wine they permitted it but not for a cattle stall. And even though he limits it, it is only to improve it. And if the a shop or cattle-shed preceded the storehouse, he cannot strike his hand to say, “I cannot sleep for the sound of the hammer or the sound of the millstone or the bad smell or the sound of the children.”
For one’s neighbor, they cannot force him. Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel says, for his neighbor, they can force him. If he has a store in the public domain and wants to open it to the courtyard, the partners can prevent him because he increases [the traffic on] the path for them. If he has a house in the shared courtyard and wants to divide it and teach children in it, they can prevent him because he increases [the traffic on] the path for them. If he has a roof in the public domain and he wants to build an upper story on it to open into the courtyard, the partners can prevent him because he increases [the traffic on] the path for them. What should he do? He makes a staircase and opens it into his house.
They distance the wall four amot from the windows from above. And from the sides, so that [no one] should see. Below, so no one should peek. Across, so [a shadow] does not fall [on the window]. They distance a ladder four amot from the dovecote so they can erect the ladder and a wall four amot from the gutter so he has space to plaster.
They distance the dovecote fifty amot from the city. The one who buys a dovecote from his fellow and it fell, even in a quarter-kav, he build in its place. A fallen [bird[ found between two dovecotes, fifty amot from this one and fifty amot from this one, it belongs to its finder. Rabbi Akiva says, to any side he makes [it] and he distances it fifty amot except for the west because it is steady.
They distance a pool for steeping from vegetables and leeks from onions and mustard from bees. Rabbi Yosei permits the mustard, as he says to him, just as your will act in yours, so I will act in mine. And Rabbi Yosei says they distance the bees fifty amot from the city because they sting people. Rabbi Natan says, the one who raises up bees is like the one who raises up dogs. Rabbi Natan says, they distance furnaces fifty amot from the city and a tree twenty-five amot from the city. And just as they distance these from the city, they distance theym from cisterns, ditches, and caves. And just as they distasnce from these, so they distance them from graves. A grave which the city surrounded, whether from four sides of from three sides, or on two sides opposite one another, if it is more than fifty amot on this side and fifty amot on that side, they do not empty it. If the distance is less, they empty the graves. They empty all graves except the grave of a kind or the grave of a prophet. Rabbi Akiva says, even the grave of a kind or a prophet they may empty. They said to him, weren’t the graves of the house of David and the grave of the prophetess Hulda in Jerusalem and no one ever touched them? He said to them, is there proof from this? Rather they had caves and they would remove impurity to nahal Qidron.
They distance the tree twenty-five amot from a cistern and in the case of a carob or sycamore, fifty amot, whether above or to the side. Rabbi Shimon says, just as they distance them above, thus they distance them below. But rabbi Yosei permits, because they gave the fields for planting. A person may not plant a tree near his fellow’s field unless he distances it four amot and if he wants he may build a divider or a wall. All vines and all trees [are the same]—they distance them four amot and plant them so cattle can pass through with its implements. If there were roots extending into his fellow’s [property], he may cut them three tefachim so that they do not prevent the plow. A tree that grows whether from the trunk or from the roots, these belong to the owner of the house. An irrigated field or a tree by the plumb line, Abba Shaul says, all shade trees to the plumb line, because the shade is bad for the irrigated field.

Chapter 2

Everything that does not produce permanent fruit, for example an irrigated field, presumptive ownership is three years but not day to say. Rabbi Yehudah said, they only said three years so that one could come to Ispamia, But if he was with him in the province, once he ate of it for a year, this is presumptive ownership. The one who purchases from another purchaser, even though the first purchaser says, “It was stolen by me,” he cannot destroy the power of the other. The one who eats of the field via a deed and it is found that the deed is invalid, this is not valid presumptive ownership. The one who eats of the field assuming that it is his and one brought against him a document that he sold it to him or that he gave it to him as a gift, let the document be upheld through its signers. If he says, I wrote a document and I received money, the document is torn by his hand. Everything follows presumptive ownership. The one who eats of the field six years and [someone else[ contested the legality for the first three years and in the end he says to him, you sold it to me, or you gave it to me as a gift, if according to the original plea, he does not have presumptive ownership as all claims of which part are nullified, the entirety is nullified.
When do they say a tenant farmer swears when there is no claim? All the time that he is a tenant farmer. If he leaves his tenancy, he is like everyone else. A partner, so long as he is a partner. If he leaves his partnership, he is just like everyone else. An administrator, so long as he is an administrator. If he leaves his position as an administrator, he is just like everyone else. The son who shares, and the woman who is divorced, they are like everyone else. Those who accept bailments, and shepherds, and hired workers cannot acquire through presumptive ownership. Craftsmen cannot acquire through presumptive ownership. Howso? If one saw his tools at the launderer’s or his slave at the craftsman’s, he says to him, give me what is mine, and he says to him, you sold them to me or you gave them to me as a gift, this is not presumptive ownership. You told me to sell them [or] you told me to give them as a gift, this is presumptive ownership.
Presumptive ownership occurs in three years. If the father presumptively owned for one year and the son for two, or the father for two and the son for one, this is presumptive ownership. The father for a year and the son for a year and a purchaser for one year, this is presumptive ownership. If someone else held [the property presumptively] in front of the father for a year and before the son for two years, this is presumptive ownership. Before the father for two years and the son for a year, this is presumptive ownership. Before the father for a year and before the son for a year and before the purchaser for a year, this is presumptive ownership.
If one held [the property presumptively] in the presence of two for the first year and two in the second year and two in the third year, these are three acts of testimony and they are a single witness. If the first [pair] was found to be perjured, he has [evidence] about two years. If the second [pair was found to be perjured], he has [evidence] for a year. If the third [pair], he has nothing. If the first and last [pairs] are the same and it is found they committed perjury, if about the first year, he has nothing. If about the second, he has evidence f one year. If about the third, he has evidence about two years. Rabbi Yosei said, Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri came to R. Halafta’s place. He said to him, if one possessed in the presence of two in the first year and two in the second year and two in the third year, what then? He said to him, this is presumptive ownership. He said to him, Even I say this, but Akiva says it is not presumptive ownership. Rabbi Yehuda says, indeed it says, “Solomon had twelve prefects governing all Israel, who provided him food” (1 Kings 4:7). And it says, “There was one prefect who was in the land” )1 Kings 4:19). One should say that this one was for an intercalated month. Rabbi Nehemia says, this is an administrator who was appointed on behalf of all of them, for it is not praiseworthy for a king to have twelve serving him. Rather, the twelve serve one and the one serves the king.
The one who seizes the property of a convert, if he locked it or fenced it or breached [its fence] in any measure, this is presumptive ownership. If one locked it and one walled it, this is presumptive ownership. If two locked it and two walled it, this is presumptive ownership. If he had ten fields, since he seized one of them, he has presumptively secured all of them. Ten slaves, even if he seized one, he did not seize all of them. Tools and slaves, if he acquired the tools, he has not acquired the slaves; the slaves, he has not acquired the tools. Tools and real estate, if he acquired the real estate he did not acquire the tools; the tools, he did not acquire the real estate. Slaves and real estate, if he acquired the slaves, he did not acquire the real estate; the real estate, he did not acquire the slaves. If he trespassed, whether long or short ways, that’s acquisition. If two trespassed, this one acquires the place of his trespass and this one acquires the place of his trespass, according to Rabbi Eliezer. But the sages say, the two of them have not acquired unless they presumptively possessed it. If one bought from him ten fields, once he has presumptively owned one of them, he has presumptively owned all of them. If he leased ten fields from him, one he presumptively owned one of them, he presumptively owned all of them. If he purchased part and rented part and acquired through presumptive ownership, whether the purchased or the leased, this is presumptive ownership. Property that cannot act as a guarantee is acquired with property that can serve as a guarantee by money, a document, or presumptive ownership. Howso? He says to him, the courtyard and all that is within it I sell to you, once he has written the document and received money and he has presumptively owned one of [the objects], he has presumptively owned all of them. A place for setting up an oven or a stove in a courtyard, this is not presumptive ownership. A beam on them at all, this is presumptive ownership. Chickens in the courtyard, this is not presumptive ownership. If he makes for them a roof ten tefachim high, this is presumptive ownership. A water pipe does not create presumptive ownership. The place where it discharges does cfreate presumptive ownership. A doorway in a courtyard even if it is stopped up, this is not presumptive ownership. If he broke its doorposts, this is presumptive ownership. What is a Tyrian window? Any through which a man’s hand can enter, according to Rabbi Meir, and only if it has a frame or shape of a door. And indeed Rabbi Meir said, a person should not open a door atop the door of his fellow or a window on top of the window of his fellow or a door on top of the window of his fellow or a window on top of a door of his fellow. But the sages permit, so long as it is distances four amot. Abba Shaul says, a person should not open a store across from a courtyard of his fellow so that he does not sit in the store and look at what is going on in his fellow’s courtyard. But this one may open into the public domain and that one may open into the public domain.
Just as those who belong to the courtyard can object to what happens in the joint courtyard, thus can the residents of an alleyway object to what happens in the joint alleyway. Howso? If one built a bathhouse next to his fellow’s bathhouse, a store within the store of his fellow, he cannot prevent him by saying, you have brought an obstacle to me, as the other can say, just as you do within your property so I do within my property. If one’s water was crossing onto the roof of his fellow and he went up and stopped it, he can prevent him from doing so, unless he knows in which place he will lead it. If the public way or a stream passed through one’s field and he got up and fenced it so that they cross through his fellow’s field, he can’t prevent him saying, you have brought an obstacle to me, as he can say, just as I do on my property, thus you can do on yours. Rabbi Yehudah says, The public that selected a path for itself, what it selects, it selects. If he has a cistern in his fellow’s courtyard, and the owner of the courtyard wants to dig another cistern, he can prevent him. But he cannot make it a public well or a public immersion pool, and he cannot fill it and give water [to his animals] or fill it and sell it. But he may fill it and water [animals] in the marketplace and sell in the marketplace. If he bought a courtyard and within it were brackets and balconies, and they fell, he can build them in their place. He may not paint, or plaster, or stucco. If he bought a house that was pained or plastered or stuccoed, he has the power over that. A man can plaster his whole house but he leaves a part out as a memory of Jerusalem. A person makes all the parts of a meal but leaves out part as a memory of Jerusalem. A woman does all her makeup but leaves part as a memory of Jerusalem, as it says, “If I forget you, o Jerusalem, let my right wither, let my tongue stick to my palate” (Psalms 137:5-6). All who mourn for her in this world will be happy with her in the next, as it says, “Rejoice with Jerusalem and be glad for her, all you who love her. Join in her jubilation, all you who mourned over her” (Isaiah 66:10).

Chapter 3

One who sells the house sells the door and the door bolt and the lock and the hewn out mortar. But he does not sell the oven or the stove or the millstone or the stationary mortar. Rabbi Eliezer says, anything attached to the ground, this is sold. And if he said to him, it and what is in it I sell to you, all of it is sold. Even though he said to him, it and all that is it in it I sell to you, he did not sell to him the cistern, the ditch, the cellars, the extensions, or the caves that are within it. If so, why does he write “the depth and the height”? So if he wants to raise up he can raise up and if he wants to lower down he has the right to lower down. Everything that is not sold in the house is sold with the courtyard. The one who sells the courtyard sells the house. The one who sells the house does not sell the courtyard except the open space in the courtyard. 
One who sells the courtyard sells the houses on the inside and the houses on the outside, but he doesn’t sell the door-curtains or the curtains or the baths that are within it. If they were made for the use of the courtyard, they are all sold. A resting place made for use by the courtyard is sold, by the public is not sold. Stores that open inside are sold with it; outside, they are not sold with it. Both inside and outside, they are sold with it.
One who sells an olive press sells the molds and the wine vats and the press beams and the lower millstones, but he has not sold the sacks or the packing bags or the upper millstones. If he said to him, it and what is in it I sell to you, all of it is sold. Even though he said to him it and what is in it I sell to you, he has not sold the cistern, the ditch, the extensions, the cellars, or the caves that are within it. And if he said to him, it and all that is within it I sell to you, all of them are sold.
One who sells the bathhouse sells the houses within it and the houses outside of it and the boiler room and the furnace room and the clothing room, but he has not sold the boilers or the furnaces or the special cupboards that are in it. And if he said to him, it and what is inside it I sell to you, these are all sold. Even though she said to him, it and what is it in it I sell to you, he did not sell the ponds that provide for [the bathhouse] water, whether in the dry season or the rainy season, and not even the woodshed. If he said to him, a bathhouse and everything for its use I sell to you, these are all sold. 
One who sells a field does not sell the wine press or the watchman’s office, even though it is a vineyard. Abba Shaul says, not even the reed partition that [has an area of] a quarter-kav. He sells him all the trees except for the grafted carob and the trunk of the sycamore. What is not sold in a field is sold in a town. The one who sells a town, Rabbi Yehudah says, the guardsman is sold but the clerk is not sold. If he says, it and all that is within it I sell to you, these are sold. Even though he said to him, it and all that is within it I sell to you, he did not sell the outlying parts or its villages or the thickets that are set apart by themselves or the vivarium for animals and birds and fish.
One who sells a vineyard has sold the reeds and the pronged polls and the sycamore beams that are in it, but he did not sell the wood or the stone or the joists, whether for its ploughing or its fence, nor the compost heap or the sycamore beans that are in it. Abba Shaul says, all that is made to be used in the vineyard, it is sold. If he sold to him all of the trees aside from a half of a grafted carob in a specific place and half of a sycamore trunk in a certain place, the ret of the carobs are not sold and the rest of the trunks are not sold. 
Brothers who divided what is theirs in some place, even if he is in Judaea and they are in the Galil or he is in the Galil and they are in Judaea, or they are in one place, once one of them has acquired, they have all acquired. If he was with him in the same province, one he accepted on himself [ownership], that is acquisition. Rabbi Yosei says, if they plan in the future to cast lots, until they cast lots. Rabbi Yehudah says, the one who consecrates a field does not consecrate except for the grafted carob and the sycamore because they draw from the consecrated field.

Chapter 4

One who sells a boat has sold the wooden implements and the water tank that are within it, but he has not sold the extensions or the ballast stones or the ship’s yard or the lighting boat. Sumkhos says, he sold the fisher boat. If he sold the yoke, he sold the cows. [If he sold the cows[ he did not sell the yoke. If he sold the attachment, he did not sell the oxen. If he sold the oxen, he did not sell the attachment. Rabbi Yehudah says, everything according to the price.
Howso? A donkey and its implements I sell to you, he has sold the pack saddle and the saddle and the saddle bag and the belt, but he has not sold the bell or the clapper or the halter or the bag or the seat or the sack. Rabbi Shimon says, if there was on it a full pouch, he shakes it and gives it to him. If he said, the donkey and all that is on him I sell to you, all of it is sold. 

Chapter 5

Four rules for those who sell. Under what circumstances? Of a measure that does not belong to either of them. But one that belonged to one of them, when the first acquires. Under what circumstances? In the public domain but in a courtyard that does not belong to either of them. In the domain of the purchaser, since he accepted it, this is an acquisition. In the domain of the seller, unless he lifts it or takes it from the owner’s domain [it is not an acquisition]. In the domain of the one who accepted as a deposit, until he accepted it on himself or until he sells the place. When do they say moveable property is acquired through pulling? In the public domain or in a courtyard that does not belong to either of them. In the domain of the buyer, once he accepts it, it is acquired. In the domain of the seller, once he lift it or removes it from the owner’s domain. If in the domain of one who accepts an object as a bailment, until he accepts or he rents the place to him.
If it was broken before the measure was filled, the broken measure to the seller. If it was broken from the time it was filled, to the buyer. Rabbi Yehudah says, if there was a middleman between them and the jar was broken, the broken measure to the middleman. The sages concede to Rabbi Yehudah in a time when the flask is in a child’s hand and the storekeeper poured into it oil and it fell and broke that he is liable for the oil but exempt for the flask. And if the flask was offered and he broke it, he is liable even for the flask. Rabbi Yehudah declares him exempt, for it was on the condition that sent his son to the store, that he might lose the issar or break the flask. 