Sefer Yetzirah
ספר יצירה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Sefer Yetzirah



Chapter 1

With thirty-two wondrous paths of wisdom, Y"H YHW"H Tzevaot, God of Israel, Living God and King of the World, El Shaddai, Merciful and Compassionate, High and Lofty One Dwelling Eternally Above, Holy is His Name [Isaiah 57:15]—[God] engraved and created [God's] world with three ס-פ-ר: with סְפֹר (enumeration), סֵפֶר (scroll), and סִפּוּר (telling). 
Ten Sefirot without matter,  and twenty-two letters of foundation: Three mothers, seven pairs, and twelve simple ones.
Ten matterless Sefirot: The number of ten fingers, five against five, covenant of the One fixed in the middle, like a word of the tongue or circumcision of the genitals.
Ten are the numbers of the matterless sefirot. Ten and not nine, ten and not eleven. Understand with wisdom and be wise with understanding, examine them and glean from them. Render the matter to one’s Creator, and return the Maker to [the Maker's] site.
Ten Sefirot without matter: Their measure is ten which have no end. Depth of beginning, depth of end; depth of good, depth of evil; depth of above, depth of below; depth of west, depth of east; depth of north, depth of south. The One Lord, El, Faithful King, rules over them all from the abode of [the Lord's] holiness, for ever and ever and ever.
Ten Sefirot without matter: Their visage is like the look of a flash of lightning, their limit has no end. [God's] word is in them, running and returning [Ezekiel 1:14]. Like a whirlwind they pursue, before [God's] throne they bow.
Ten Sefirot without matter: Their end is attached to their beginning, and their beginning to their end, like how the flame-tongue is bound to the coal. For the Lord is One and has no second; before one, what do you count?
Ten matterless Sefirot: Withhold your mouth from speaking and your mind from pondering. If your mind should run, return to the place of which thus has been said, [Ezekiel 1:14] “And the living beings were running and returning.” Upon this matter the Covenant was founded.
Ten matterless Sefirot: One – Spirit of the Living God, blessed and glorified is the name of the life of the worlds, voice and spirit and speech. This is the Holy Spirit.
Two – [God] engraved air from spirit, and with it carved twenty-two letters of foundation: three mothers, seven pairs, and twelve simple ones. Air is first of them.
Three – [God] engraved water from air, and with them carved tohu and bohu—mud and loam. [God] engraved them like a garden bed, erected them like a wall, covered them like pavement.
Four – [God] engraved fire from water, and with it carved the throne of [God's] glory, serafim and ofanim, and the holy living beings and the ministering angels. From the three of them [God] founded [God's] abode, as has been written, [Psalms 104:4] "[God] makes the winds [God's] messengers, burning fire [God's] servants."
[God] clarified three letters from the simple ones with the secret of the three mothers—א-מ-ש—and [God] inserted them in [God's] great name, and sealed with them six directions. Five – [God] sealed Above, and turned upwards and sealed it in YH"W. Six – [God] sealed Below, and turned downwards and sealed it in YW"H. Seven – [God] sealed East, and turned forwards and sealed it in HY"W. Eight – [God] sealed West, and turned backwards and sealed it in HW"Y. Nine – [God] sealed South, and turned to the right and sealed it in WY"H. Ten – [God] sealed North, and turned to the left and sealed it in WH"Y.
These are the ten matterless Sefirot. The first is the Spirit of the Living God; air from spirit and water from air and fire from water, and above and below, east and west, north and south.

Chapter 2

Twenty-two letters of foundation: three mothers, seven pairs, and twelve simple ones. The three mothers are ש ,מ ,א. Their foundation is the palm of innocence and the palm of guilt, and the tongue of decree decides between the two.
Twenty-two letters: He engraves them, carves them, weighs and transmutes them, combines them and forms with them the soul of all—of all created, and soul of all He has yet to form.
Twenty-two letters of foundation: engraved with voice, carved with spirit, inserted into the mouth in five places: ק-כ-י-ג ,פ-מ-ו-ב ,ע-ה-ח-א צ-ר-ש-ס-ז ,ת-נ-ל-ט-ד. [Dividing the consonants into five articulations -- the gutturals (אחה״ע), labials (בומ״ף), dorsals (גיכ״ק), laminals (דטלנ״ת), and apicals (זסשר״ץ).]
Twenty-two letters of foundation: inserted into a wheel with 231 gates. The wheel turns forwards and back. This is a cipher for the word: if for goodness above, it pleases, and if for evil below, it afflicts.
How does one weigh and transmute them? א with all of them and all of them with ב ,א with all of them and all of them with ב, turning round. All which is formed and spoken is found, emerging in one name.
He created from תֹּהוּ—substance—and made nonexistence existent. He carved great columns from the imperceptible ether. This is a cipher, overseeing and transmuting, making all formed things and all words into one name. A cipher for the word: twenty-two objects in one essence. [These last three verses may refer to a kind of mystical diagram. In one interpretation of this 'wheel', the 22 letters of the Hebrew alphabet are arranged as 22 points along the outer edge of a circle, and straight lines are drawn between each possible combination of letters, totaling 231. In such a diagram, 11 lines converge through a single point in the center, one of which connects the letters א׳ and ל׳, spelling אל, God, as the center point of the wheel. By contemplating such a diagram and 'transmuting' (ממיר) words according to it, one can eventually return all combinations of letters back to this central point labeled אל, the "one name" alluded to here and above.]

Chapter 3

The three mother [letters] ש ,מ, א, their foundation is a pan (of a scale) of culpability and a pan of merit, and the tongue of decree decides between them.
The three mothers - ש ,מ ,א - a mighty mystery, most occult and most marvelous, sealed as with six rings, and from them proceed Fire, Water, [and Air]; these are subsequently differentiated into male and female. Three mothers - ש ,מ ,א - their foundation. And from them were born fathers and all was created from them.
The three mother letters - ש ,מ ,א -  are air, water, and fire in the world. Heaven [<b>שָׁ</b>מַיִם] is created from Fire; the Earth from Water [<b>מַ</b>יִם]; and the Air [<b>אֲ</b>וִיר] which decides between the fire and the water.
During the year, or in regards to time in general, these three mothers represent Hot, Cold, and Warm. The hot from the fire, the cold from the water, and the warm from the spiritual air, which again is an equalizer between them. These three mothers again represent in the Microcosm human form, male and female; the Head, the Belly, and the Chest. The head from the hot fire, the belly from cold water, and the chest from the warm air that lieth between them.
These three mothers did He create, form, and design, and with the three mothers combine in the world, and in the year, and in Man, both male and female. 
He caused א to reign in the air, and crowned it, and combined one with the other, and with these He sealed the Air in the world, the warmth of the year, and the chest (the lungs) in man; the male with ש-מ-א, the female with מ-ש-א. 
He caused מ to predominate in Water, and crowned it, and combined it with others, and formed Earth in the world, cold in the year, and the belly in the soul, male and female, male with ש-א-מ and female with א-ש-מ.
He caused ש to reign in Fire and crowned it, and He combined one with the other, and sealed them, as heaven in the universe, as heat in the year, and as the head of Man and Woman. [Male with מ-א-ש and female with א-מ-ש.]

Chapter 4

There were formed seven 'double' letters: ת ,ר ,פ, כ ;ד ,ג ,ב. Each has two voices, either soft or hard (spirantized or unspirantized). These are the foundations of Life, Peace, Riches, Beauty or Reputation, Wisdom, Fruitfulness, and Power. These are double, because their opposites take part in life, opposed to Life is Death; to Peace, War; to Riches, Poverty; to Beauty or Reputation, Deformity or Disrepute; to Wisdom, Ignorance; to Fruitfulness, Sterility; to Power, Slavery.
Seven double letters – ת ,ר ,פ, כ ;ד ,ג ,ב – seven, and not six; seven, and not eight. Examine them and glean from them. Render the matter unto one's Creator, and return the Maker to His site.
Seven double letters – ת ,ר ,פ, כ ;ד ,ג ,ב – corresponding to seven dimensions: of these, six dimensions - above and below, East and West, North and South, and the Holy Chamber is oriented to the center and it carries them all. 
These seven double letters – ת ,ר ,פ, כ ;ד ,ג ,ב – He formed, designed, created, and combined into the Stars of the Universe, the days of the week, the orifices of perception in man; and from them he made seven heavens, and seven planets, and seven Sabbaths; accordingly, the seventh is preferred under all the heavens.  
He caused and produced ב, predominant in wisdom, crowned, combined, and formed the Saturn in the Universe, the first day of the week [Heb: the year?], and the right eye, of man.
ג, predominant in health, crowned, combined and formed Jupiter in the Universe, the second day of the week, and the left eye in man.
ד, predominant in fertility, crowned, combined, and formed Mars in the Universe, the third day of the week, and the right ear in man.
כ, predominant in life, crowned, combined, and formed the Sun in the Universe, the fourth day of the week, and the left ear of man.
פ, predominant in power, crowned, combined, and formed Venus in the Universe, the fifth day of the week, and the right nostril in man.
ר, predominant in peace, crowned, combined, and formed Mercury in the Universe, the sixth day of the week, and the left nostril in man.
ת, predominant in beauty, crowned, combined and formed the Moon in the Universe, the seventh day in the week, and the mouth of man.
Seven doubles - how are they combined? Two "stones" produce two houses; three form six; four form twenty-four; five form one hundred and twenty; six form seven hundred and twenty; seven form five thousand and forty; and beyond this their numbers increase so that the mouth can hardly utter them, nor the ear hear the number of them. So now, behold the Stars of our World, the Planets which are Seven; the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars. The Seven are also the Seven Days of Creation; and the Seven Gateways of the Soul of Man—the two eyes, the two ears, the mouth and the two nostrils. So with the Seven are formed the seven heavens, the seven earths, and the seven periods of time; and so has He preferred the number Seven above all things under His Heaven.

Chapter 5

The simple letters are twelve, namely: ק ,צ ,ע ,ס ,נ ,ל ,י ,ט ,ח ,ז ,ו ,ה; they represent the fundamental properties, sight, hearing, smell, speech, desire for food, the sexual appetite, movement, anger, mirth, thought, sleep, and work. These symbolize also the twelve directions in space: northeast, southeast, the east above, the east below, northwest, southwest, the west above, the west below, the upper south, the lower south, the upper north, the lower north. These diverge to all eternity, and are as the arms of the universe.
These twelve letters, He designed, formed, combined, weighed, and changed, and created with them the twelve divisions of the heavens (namely, the zodiacal constellations), the twelve months of the year, and the twelve important organs of the frame of the human, namely the right and left hands, the right and left feet, the two kidneys, the liver, the gall, the spleen, the intestines, the gullet, and the stomach. God produced ה, predominant in Speech, crowned, combined, and formed Aries in the world, Nisan in the year, and the right hand of man and woman. God produced ו, predominant in Mind, crowned, combined, and formed Taurus in the world, Iyar in the year, and the left hand of the human. God produced ז, predominant in movement, crowned, combined, and formed Gemini in the world, Sivan in the year, and the right foot of the human. He produced ח, predominant in Sight, crowned, combined, and formed Cancer in the world, Tammuz in the year, and the left foot of the human. He produced ט, predominant in Hearing, crowned, combined, and formed Leo in the world, Av in the year, and the right kidney in the human. He produced י, predominant in Labor, crowned, combined, and formed Virgo in the world, Elul in the year, and the left kidney of the human. He produced ל, predominant in Sexual Desire, crowned, combined, and formed Libra in the world, Tishrei in the year, and the gall in the human. He produced נ, predominant in smell, crowned, combined, and formed Scorpio in the world, Marchesvan in the year, and the intestines in the human. He produced ס, predominant in Sleep, crowned, combined, and formed Sagittarius in the world, Kislev in the year, and the stomach of the human. He produced ע, predominant in Anger, crowned, combined, and formed Capricornus in the world, Tevet in the year, and the liver in the human. He produced צ, predominant in Taste, crowned, combined, and formed Aquarius in the world, Shevat in the year, and the gullet in the human. He produced ק, predominant in Mirth, crowned, combined, and formed Pisces in the world, Adar in the year, and the spleen in the human.
Three 'mothers', seven 'double' and twelve 'simple', these are the twenty-two letters. 
ה–ו–ה–י, Tetragrammaton, that is our Lord of Hosts, exalted, and existed in the ages, whose Name is Holy, created three 'fathers', fire and spirit and water, progressing beyond them, seven heavens with their armies of angels; and twelve limits of the universe. 

Chapter 6

In proof of these things, and witnessing faithfully are the Universe, the Year of time, and Man himself, the Microcosm. He fixed these as testimonies of the Triad, the Heptad, and the Dodecad; the twelve constellations, rulers of the world, the Dragon Tali which environs the universe, and the microcosm, man. The triad, fire, water, and air; the fire above, the water below, and the air in the midst. The proof of which is that air is a participator with both.
Tali, the Dragon, is above the Universe, as a king on his throne; the sphere in the year as a king in his State, the Heart of man as a king in warfare. And our God made the states of opposition, good and evil, good from the good, and evil from the evil. Happiness is reserved for the just, and misery for the wicked ones.
And out of the triad one stands apart; and in the heptad there are two triads, and one standing apart. The dodecad symbolizes war, the triad of amity, the triad of enmity, three which are life-giving, three which are death-dealing, and God, the faithful king, rules over all from the throne of his sanctity. One above three, three above seven, and seven above twelve, and all are linked together, and one with another.
After that our father Abraham had seen, and pondered over, investigated, and understood these things, he designed, engraved, and composed them, and received them into his power (hands). Then the Lord of all appeared unto him, made a covenant with him, and kissed his head, and naming him after his own name, called him his friend; and as it is written, completed a covenant with him and with his seed forever, who then believed on God, the Tetragrammaton, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. God ordained a covenant between the toes of his feet, that of circumcision; and a covenant between the fingers of his hands, that of the Tongue. He bound the essences of the twenty-two letters on his tongue, and God disclosed to him the secrets of them. God has carried these through waters, He has borne them aloft through fire, and He has stamped them in the storms of the air; He has distributed them among the seven stars, and has assigned them to twelve celestial constellations. Amen.