Eikhah Rabbah
איכה רבה
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Eikhah Rabbah

Petichta







Chapter 1


























“…she has no comforter…” (Lamentations 1:2) R’ Levi said: every place where it says ‘has no,’ she has. “And Sarai was barren; she had no child.” (Genesis 11:30) And she did have, as it says “And the Lord remembered Sarah…” (Genesis 21:1) Similarly, “…but Hannah had no children.” (Samuel I 1:2) And she did have, as it says “For the Lord remembered Hannah…” (Samuel I 2:21) Similarly, “…that is Zion whom no one seeks out.” (Jeremiah 30:17) And she did have, as it says “And a redeemer shall come to Zion…” (Isaiah 59:20) And so too you say that she has no comforter - she has, as it says “I, yea I am He Who consoles you…” (Isaiah 51:12)
























... for the comforter to restore my soul is removed from me – What is the name of the king Messiah? R’ Aba bar Kahana said: the Lord is his name, “…and this is his name that he shall be called, The Lord is our righteousness.” (Yirmiyahu 23:6) For R’ Levi said: it is good for a city that its name be the same as its king, and that the name of the king be the same as its God. It is good for a city that its name be the same as its king, as it is written “…and the name of the city from that day will be ‘The Lord is There.’ (Ezekiel 48:35) And the name of its king the same as its God, as it says “…and this is his name that he shall be called, The Lord is our righteousness.” R’ Yehoshua ben Levi said: Shoot is his name, as it says “…Behold a man whose name is the Shoot, who will spring up out of his place …” (Zechariah 6:12) R’ Yudan said in the name of R’ Ibbo: comforter is his name, as it says “…for the comforter to restore my soul is removed from me…” (Eicha 1:16) R’ Chanina said: they are not arguing, each one’s account is the same – he is comforter, he is shoot, because this statement supports the other statement of R’ Yudan in the name of R’ Iddo.

Chapter 2








... “…in the tent of the daughter of Zion, He has poured out His fury, which is like fire.” (Lamentations 2:4) There are four ‘pouring out’ for good and four ‘pouring out’ for evil. The four for good: “And I will pour out upon the house of David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem a spirit of grace and supplications. (Zechariah 12:10) “And it shall come to pass afterwards that I will pour out My spirit upon all flesh…” (Yoel 3:1) “And even upon the slaves and the maidservants in those days will I pour out My spirit.” (Yoel 3:2) “And I shall no longer hide My face from them, for I shall have poured out My spirit upon the House of Israel…” (Ezekiel 39:29) the four for evil: “And He poured out upon them the fury of His anger…” (Isaiah 42:25) “…when You pour out Your fury on Jerusalem…” (Ezekiel 9:8) “The Lord has spent His fury, He has poured out His fierce anger…” (Lamenations 4:11). So too, “…in the tent of the daughter of Zion, He has poured out His fury, which is like fire.”

Chapter 3



Chapter 4















“The kings of the earth did not believe, nor all the inhabitants of the world, that a foe or enemy could enter the gates of Jerusalem.” (Lamentations 4:12) There were four kings, and each one demanded what the others did not demand. They are David, Asa, Yehoshafat and Hezekiah. Regarding David it says “I have pursued my enemies and overtaken them…” (Psalms 18:38) The Holy One said to him: I will do so. This is what is written “And David smote them from evening until evening to their morrow…” (Samuel I 30:17) What does ‘to their morrow’ mean? R’ Yehoshua ben Levi said: for two nights and one day. The Holy One lit up the night for him with shooting stars and lightning, as it is taught (Mishna Berachot 2:9) ‘on shooting stars, on earthquakes and on lightning.’ This is what is written “For You light my lamp…” (Psalms 18:29) Asa stood up and said: I do not have the strength to kill them, rather I will pursue them and You do the rest. This is what is written “And Asa and the people who were with him pursued them… for they were broken before the Lord and before His camp, and they carried away very much spoils.” (Chronicles II 14:12) It is not written ‘before Asa’ but rather ‘before the Lord and before His camp.’ Yehoshafat stood up and said: I have no strength to kill or to pursue, rather I will sing a song and You do the rest. The Holy One said to him: I will do so, as it says “And at the time they commenced with song and praise…” (Chronicles II 20:22) Hezekiah stood up and said: I have no strength to kill, or to pursue or to sing a song, rather I will sleep on my bed and You do the rest. The Holy One said to him: I will do so, as it says “And it came to pass on that night that an angel of the Lord went out and slew one hundred eighty-five thousand of the camp of Assyria…” (Kings II 19:35)

Chapter 5




















“Why do You forget us forever, forsake us so long?” (Eicha 5:20) R’ Yehoshua ben Avin said, ‘Yirmiyahu made four claims – abandonment, forgetting, rejection and wrath.’ Abandonment and forgetting - “Why do You forget us forever, forsake us so long?” Rejection and wrath – “For if You have utterly rejected us, You have been exceedingly wrathful against us.” (Eicha 5:22) Rejection had already been reversed in his days, as it says “So said the Lord: If the heavens above will be measured and the foundations of the earth below will be fathomed, I too will reject…” (Yirmiyahu 31:36) Wrath was already reversed in the days of Yeshayahu, as it says “For I will not contend forever, neither will I be wrathful to eternity…” (Is. 57:16) Abandonment and forgetting have not been reversed, therefore Zion complains and says “But Zion said: ‘The Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me.’” (Is. 49:14) R’ Yehoshua ben Levi said ‘Yirmiyahu made four claims – abandonment, forgetting, rejection and despising.’ Abandonment and forgetting - “Why do You forget us forever, forsake us so long?” Rejection and despising – “Have You indeed rejected Judah? Has Your soul despised Zion? (Yirmiyahu 14:19) Rejection and despising were already reversed in the days of Moshe, as it says “But despite all this, while they are in the land of their enemies, I will not despise them nor will I reject them to annihilate them…” (Vayikra 26:44) Abandonment and forgetting have not been reversed, therefore Zion complains and says “But Zion said: ‘The Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me.’” (Is. 49:14)