Meshekh Chokhmah
משך חכמה
YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
http://www.torontotorah.com

Meshekh Chokhmah

Bereshit



Noakh



Lekh Lekha



Vayera



Khayei Sarah



Toldot



Vayetze



Vayishlakh



Vayeshev



Miketz









‎“Now, Pharaoh should find an‎‏ ‏understanding and wise man”‎ ... <br> Pharaoh was holy to the Egyptians. As‏ ‏such, it wasn’t his role to look into‏ ‏human affairs and the ‎matters of his‏ ‏land. And because “the highest over the‏ ‏high waits, and there are higher ones‏ ‏over ‎them,” theft and robbery were‏ ‏rampant. Woe to the land whose leaders‏ ‏are many! Therefore, in ‎Egypt there was‏ ‏a tremendous distortion of justice as‏ ‏was seen when a person from a far land‏ ‏was ‎thrown in prison for life over a‏ ‏personal matter, imprisoned‏ ‏without justice. Every bureaucrat did as he‏ ‏pleased. Therefore, Pharaoh was shown‏ ‏the dreams ‎about the cows first, to‏ ‏demonstrate that Hashem wasn’t going‏ ‏to have the famine impact ‎Pharaoh, for‏ ‏the sake of the animals, “Hashem saves‏ ‏for the sake of animals.” For this reason‏ ‏Yosef stated, “As to the repetition of the‏ ‏dreams.”‎ ‎“Now, Pharaoh should find an‏ ‏understanding and wise man”‎‏ ‏‎-‎‏ ‏‎“man”‎‏ ‏and not “godly” or “holy”, for his‏ ‏greatness [in leadership] should be that‏ ‏he knows the ways of civility and‏ ‏organization. [Therefore,] ‎‎“He should be‎‏ ‏placed over all of Egypt”‎‏ ‏‎– that‏ ‏everything should be in his hands. If a‏ ‏bureaucrat were ‎to twist the law, his eye‏ ‏would be above him watching. No one‏ ‏would be able to decide law on their ‎own‏ ‏without first consulting the leader of‏ ‏Egypt. And therefore the cows were‏ ‏mentioned first, to ‎point out the‏ ‏corruption of justice in the land of‏ ‏Egypt. And when [Pharaoh] appointed‏ ‏him, he stated ‎‎- look and oversee all the‏ ‏affairs of the land, for “I’ve given you all‏ ‏of Egypt.” If there is a twisting of ‎the‏ ‏law, it will be dealt with by you‏ ‏alone. Therefore, when Yosef wanted to‏ ‏imprison his brothers ‎without a trial‏ ‏and consensus of the community, he‏ ‏said, “You are spies!”‎‏ ‏‎- something that‏ ‏would ‎involve the monarchy and would‏ ‏not need to be publicized amongst the‏ ‏populace [in order to be ‎acted upon].‎‏ ‏Similarly, Yosef stated, “I am Pharaoh,”‎‏ ‏referring to the divine monarchy in the‏ ‏Egyptian ‎language. [This communicates‏ ‏that] it is below my honour to supervise‏ ‏the iniquity and tricks of ‎people.‎‏ ‏‎“Without you...” for you will supervise all‎‏ ‏that occurs in the land of Egypt.‎‏ ‏Understand this.”‎

Vayigash



Vayekhi



Shemot


For the prophecy of all of [the  prophets] was via signs and wonders, and anyone who believes [solely] based on signs has a flaw in his faith, unless [the prophet who performs the   sign]   is   endorsed   by   a prophet  who  is  known  to  be  a  valid prophet,  as  in  the  case  of  Elisha,  who was   endorsed   by   Eliyahu.   The   only reason [to believe a sign at all] is that the Torah   said   to   believe   a   prophet   who presents  a  sign  or  wonder,  just  as  it instructed   to   believe   witnesses   even though  there  is  no  guarantee  that  they always testify truthfully... Moshe was not like this, for all Israel heard G-d speak with Moshe face-to-face, and all of them attained the level of prophecy and saw how G-d spoke with him.  Therefore  Shemot 19:9 said, “Behold, I am going to come to you in the thick of the cloud, so that (the nation will hear  when  I  speak with you),  and  they will also believe in you forever”... 
But if so, how could G-d command that they always believe in Moshe? “All is in the hands of Heaven, except reverence for Heaven” (Berachot  33b), and  how could [Moshe’s prophetic] knowledge compel his choice?Perhaps Moshe could later choose, G-d forbid, to add to Torah on his own! It must be that G-d removed from Moshe freedom of choice in entirety, and he remained compelled, like angels ... But all Israel, who were not worthy  of such a level and a prophetic encounter, but only experienced it in order to uphold the religion – lest some sower of confusion come contradict one  point  via sign  or  wonder – they needed to ascend to that high level to hear the voice of G-d speaking from within the  fire ... But afterward, they  returned to free choice, without which their existence would have no purpose ...
But all  Israel, who were not worthy of such a level and a prophetic  encounter, but only experienced it in order to uphold the religion –lest    some sower of confusion come contradict one point via sign or wonder – they needed  to  ascend to that high level to hear the voice of G-d speaking  from within the fire ... But afterward, they returned to free choice, without which their existence would have no purpose ...

Vaera



Bo



Beshalakh



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Haftarat Shekalim



Haftarat Zakhor



Haftarat Hakhodesh



Haftarat Shabbat Hagadol



Haftarat First Day Pesakh



Haftarat Last Day Pesakh



Hafatarat Shabbat Rosh Khodesh



Megillat Esther



Vayikra



Tzav



Shemini



Tazria



Metzora



Akharei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bekhukotai



Bamidbar



Naso



Behaalotkha



Shelakh



Korakh



Khukkat



Balak



Pinekhas



Mattot



Masei



Ruth



Devarim



Va'etkhanan



Ekev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Tetze



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayelekh



Haazinu



Vezot Haberakha



Eikhah



Derush

