Onkelos Numbers
תרגום אונקלוס על במדבר
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Onkelos Numbers



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

And Hashem spoke to Moses, saying






the entire time that he is in his state of being a Nazirite, he is sanctifies before Hashem













And Hashem spoke to Moses, saying:
Speak with Aharon and with his sons, saying this is how you will bless the Children of Israel. Say to them:
May Hashem bless you and guard you.
May Hashem [reveal] (lit. "shine") his presence upon you and love you.

And they [the Priests] should place the blessing [that is] My name upon the Children of Israel, and I will bless them.

Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22

And the children of Israel traveled, and they settled in the camps of Moav, beyond the Jordan of Jericho.
And Balak son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites.
And Moav were afraid because of the nation also because they were numerous, and they were distressed because of the children of Israel.

Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30

And Moses said to the children of Israel all that God commanded Moses.
And Moses spoke with the leaders of the tribes of the children of Israel saying, These are the words that God has commanded:
Any man who vows a vow before God, or oaths an oath to prohibit a prohibition on himself, he cannot void his word; anything that his mouth utters he shall do.
And any woman who vows a vow before God, or prohibits a prohibition in her father's house, as a young girl
And her father hears her vow and prohibition that she prohibited on herself, and her father remains silent, and all her vows are upheld, all her prohibitions she prohibited on herself are upheld.