Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chayyim
אורח חיים
Translated by Jay Dinovitser
http://www.shulchanarach.com/



Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chayyim

Siman 1

1. One should strengthen himself like a lion to get up in the morning to serve his creator. He should get up early enough to welcome in the dawn. [ And at least not after the Z'man Tefilah (time for praying) in which the congregation prays. Scripture says, "I placed Hashem before me always". This is a great concept in the Torah and is a paramount attribute for the Tzadikim (righteous people) who walk in the way of G-d. For the way in which a person sits, moves around, and carries out his daily activities while he is alone his house is not the same way he should engage in these activities while standing before a great King. In addition, the way one speaks while amongst those in his home and the conversations he partakes with his relatives is not the same manner in which he would speak while in the presence of a mortal King. Surely when one considers in his mind that the mighty King, The Holy One blessed be his name, where the whole world is filled with his glory, stands before him and sees his deeds, as it states: "If a man will conceal his secrets and I will not see it, states Hashem; immediately the fear and the proper awed train of thought of Hashem will descend upon him and he will always be embarrassed before G-d. And one should not be ashamed before people who mock his service to Hashem. Also, when one is in private and when one lies on his bed, he should know before whom he is lying and immediately his should arise with enthusiasm to serve his creator and he will get up.] 
2. One who wishes to get up early and pray before his creator should try to do so at the times where the angels change shifts. This occurs after one third of the night, after two thirds and after the night is over. The prayer that one prays at those times should be concerning the destruction of the Beis Hamikdash ( Holly Temple ) and on the exile.
3. It is proper for every G-d fearing person to be aggravated and worried about the destruction of the Beis Hamikdash.
4. It is better for one to say only a few supplications with concentration then to say many supplications without concentration.
5. It is a good idea to say the section on the binding of Yitzchak, the section concerning the manna, the ten commandments and the chapter on the burnt offering (עולה Olah), gift offering (מנחה Mincha), peace offering ( שׁלמים Shlamim), sin offering ( חטאת Chatas ) guilt offering ( אשׁם Asham).[ Only when one is alone it is permitted to say the ten commandments whenever he wants but it is forbidden to say it in front of ten or more men. ]
6. The korbanot parshiot ( chapters of the sacrifices) are only said during the day.
7. When one finishes the the section of the Olah, he should say "may it be your will that this should be considered and accepted as if I brought an Olah." Similarly, one should say a similar expression after reading the section of the Mincha and the Shelamim since these can be brought by a Nedava ( voluntarily ).
8. One should recite after the sections of the sacrifices the verse "And slaugher it on the side of the alter northward before Hashem"
9. There are those who are accustomed to saying the Parsha (chapter) of the Kiur ( washing basin ) followed by the parsha of the Tamid ( continual offering ) and then the parshat of the offering of the Kitoret (Spice offering) and the Parsha of the making of the Kitoret and its ingredients. 

Siman 2

1. One should not put on his undershirt while one is sitting.  Rather, while still lying in bed, one should first place his head and arms through the garment Then on should put it on.  Therefore, when one gets up he will be covered.
2. One should not say “behold I am in the most concealed of rooms, who will see me;” for the Holly One Blessed be he fills the whole world with his glory. 
 3. One should be careful to put on his undershirt properly and not inside out.[1]
 4. One should put his right shoe on first and the left shoe last.  Only after putting on the left shoe should one begin tying the shoe laces.  First tie the left shoe and then the right one.  [ In our shoes where there are no laces, one should put the right shoe on first. ]
 5. When one takes off his shoes, he should remove the left shoe first.
 6. It is forbidden to walk in an erect posture[2].  And a man should not walk four cubits[3] with an uncovered head &lt; due to respect for the holly presence[4] &gt;.  One should check to see if he needs to use the facilities ( after waking up ).  [ One should cover his entire body and should not go out barefoot.  In addition, one should accustom himself in the morning and in the evening to use the restroom. ]

Siman 3

1.When one enters the bathroom, he should say “out of respect for the honored ones etc...” but at this time it is not customary to say it. [1] 
2. One should be modest while in the bathroom and one should not uncover himself until he sits down. [ Two men should not go in together. Also, one should not speak there. One should close the door behind himself because of modesty. ] 
3. If one wishes to rub his opening with a rock or chip to open his bowels, he should do so before he sits down. One should not do so after one sits down because this is bad because of witchcraft 
4. One should not uncover himself more than a hand breath behind him and two hand breaths before himself. A woman only needs one hand breath behind her uncovered and nothing in front. [2] 
5. If one is excreting in an open place with no wall, he should be careful to face south with his back facing north or the opposite. However, it is forbidden to face east or west. [ However, urinating is allowed in any direction. ] 
6. Similarly, it is forbidden to sleep facing west or east if his wife is with him. It is proper to be careful even if his wife is not with him. [3] 
7. If one is urinating [ This is only referring to a place where one can see the Temple mount - Rashi.] he should not face the divine presence. One should [ turn north or south ] or turn side ways so he would not face the divine presence. 
8. When one is excreting in a field, if a he is behind a fence, he may go immediately. In a valley, one should distance himself until he reaches a place where his friend will be unable to see his nakedness. 
9. One should not sit down with haste or with force. And one should not force himself excessively in order to not damage the teeth of the bowel [7]. 
10. One should not use his right hand to wipe himself. 
11. One should not wipe with earthenware because of the danger of witchcraft. One should not use dried grasses since any matter that is flammable [4] will damage the teeth in his lower bowel. One should not use a rock which his friend used since it causes a person to have diarrhea. [5] [ Nowadays, in our Synagogues where the lavatories are not in the field, it has become the custom to use (earthenware and it has likewise become the custom to use) flammable articles. No harm has come from using these things. Follow the saying “go out and see what the public practices.” 
12. One should likewise practice modesty in the lavatory at night just as one does so during the day. 
13. One should not urinate standing because droplets can sprinkle on ones feet. This is unless one is urinating from a high place or onto loose earth ( earth which is not untouched, but plowed land ). [6] 
14. One should be careful to not take hold of his rod while urinating. This is only from the crown and onward because of unnecessary emitting of seed ( shifchas zera lïvatalah; this is forbidden ). An exception applies if one is married. However, it is a custom for the pious to not do so even while married. 
15. Even one who is not married is permitted to support the testes. 
16. Even a married man is only permitted to hold the penis to urinate but is not permitted to rub it. 
17. One who holds back from using the facilities transgresses the biblical commandment of “and you shall not become disgusting.” 

Siman 4

1. One should wash his hands in the morning and make the blessing על נטילת ידים.  [1] [And some say one should also recite אשר יצר even if one didn’t use the facilities and such is our custom.] Water that is invalid (פסול) to wash N’tilas Yadayim for a meal is valid for N’tilas Yadayim for prayer. However, there are those say one should not make a blessing on this.
 2. One should be careful to pour water on his hands three separate times on each hand in order to remove the bad spirit which remains on them.
 3. One should not touch his mouth, nose, ears or eyes with his hands before N’tilas Y’dayim.
4. Even if one already washed his hands, he should not continually touch the anus because it causes piles. Also, one should not touch the place of bloodletting because it damages the wound.
5. One should not touch a vat of beer (before N’tilas Yadayim)), because handling it impairs the beer.
 6. One is not required to use a רביעית for [2] for N’tilas Yadayim of the morning.
7. It is a good idea to be stringent with N’tilas Yadayim for the morning to follow all of the stringencies that apply to N’tilas Yadayim for a meal. [However, the it is not disqualified if one does not use a vessel or if one does not use man power and other things that would disqualify N’tilas Yadayim for a meal[3].]
 8. One should not put the used water of the morning N’tilas Yadayim on the ground, but place it in a vessel.[4]
 9. It is forbidden to benefit from the water of the morning N’tilas Yadayim. One should not pour out the water in his home or in a place where people frequent.
 10. One should take the vessel of water in his right hand and transfer it to his left hand in order that he should pour water on his right hand first.
 11.  One should not touch someone who has not washed N’tilas Yadayim in the morning.
12. If one dipped his hands into a vessel of water, he can pray and say the morning She’ma. However, this is not sufficient to remove the bad spirit on ones hands. If one dips his hand in three vessels of water (or one vessel and with three changes of water) it is uncertain if this is sufficient to remove the bad spirit.
13. If one was awake all night, it is uncertain whether he needs to do N’tilas Yadayim to pray and to remove the bad spirit from his hands. [He should wash them without the blessing.]
14. If one gets up before the morning light ( עמוד השׁחר ) and he does N’tilas Yadayim, it is questionable if he needs to wash another time when daybreak arrives. [ He should wash them without the blessing. ]
15. If one sleeps during the day, it is questionable if he needs to pour water three times on each hand. [ He should wash them without the blessing. ]
16. David (the King) was careful to not sleep sixty breaths in order to not feel the taste of death. [And the Gemara states in the chapter ofהישׁן that David was only careful to do this during the day.
 17. There are those who have the custom to wash their mouth in the morning, because of mucous in the mouth.
 18.  The instances when one must do N’tilas Yadayim are the following: One who gets up from his bed, one who goes out of the bathroom and from the bathhouse, one who cuts his nails, one who removes his shoes, touches his feet, one who scratches his head. There are those who add one who walks between the dead, touches a dead body, examines his garments for lice, has sex, touched a louse, and touched his body with his hand. If one did one of these things and did not wash his hands, if he is a torah scholar, his learning will be forgotten. And if he is not a torah scholar, he goes crazy.
19.  One who does bloodletting from his shoulders and did not wash N’tilas Yadayim, he should be afraid for seven days. One who shaves and did not wash, he should be afraid for 3 days. One who cut his nails and did not wash, should be afraid for one day. And he does not know from what to be afraid of.
20. One who washed his face and did not was it thoroughly; his face can become split or infested by boils. And the cure is to wash it with a lot of סילקא water.[5]
21. One should be careful while praying or when eating to not touch his leg or thigh or in any place that people cover since there are particles of sweat. Also, one should not rub his head unless it is in a place that is normally revealed like his face. There is no reason to be careful with ones arms.
22. If one has no water, he should rub his hands with a rock, dirt or with anything that can clean. He should say the blessing with the substitution ידים נקיות על and then get up for prayer. However, this does not remove the bad spirit on them.
23.  The rabbis only instituted N’tilas Yadayim for Kria Shima and for prayer. But for the shacharis blessings, one can say them before doing N’tilas Yadayim. This is unless one is lying on his bed naked. Then, it is forbidden him to mention G-d’s name until he cleans his hands.