Shulchan Arukh, Orach Chayyim
אורח חיים
Translation:Shulchan Aruch/Orach Chaim/10
http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Translation:Shulchan_Aruch/Orach_Chaim/10

Siman 1



Siman 2



Siman 3



Siman 4



Siman 5



Siman 6



Siman 7



Siman 8



Siman 9



Siman 10

 A tallit with less than four corners is exempt [from the requirement of tzitzit]. One with more than four corners requires tzitzit, and they should be put on the four corners that are the furthest from each other.
 If a tallit has four corners and one gets cut off crosswise to make two, this has now made it a five-cornered garment which requires tzitzit.
 If one folds the corners of his tallit and ties them up or sews them and it looks like it has been trimmed and no longer has corners, even so it is not exempt [from tzitzit].
A tallit made of cloth with corners made of leather requires tzitzit, while one made of leather with corners made of cloth is exempt.
 A tallit with three corners on which one has put three tzitzit [one on each corner] and then made a fourth corner and put tzitzit on it, the tzitzit is invalid because of the rule of "ta'aseh velo min he'asuy," that requires one to actively make the tzitzit rather than ahve them passively made.
One should not fold the tallit and put tzitzit on the corners that result from folding. (Rem"a: But one must put tzitzit on the four original corners) unless it is entirely sewn up even on one side. (Rem"a: But there are those who say tzitzit are required even without it being sewn up and it is good to put tzitzit on such a garment, but one should not make a blessing on it.) (The Rif, the Rosh and the Tur) If one hangs tzitzit on a garment which already has tzitzit, if it is the intention to nullify the first, one cuts the first and it is then valid, but if the intention was to simply add, then even if one cuts the first it is invalid. Rem"a: And there are those who allow it to be done in any way and this is the main view, but before the first one is cut it is invalid regardles of how it was done.
 [Regarding] Garments which are open from the sides down and have four corners on the lower part but on the upper part they are closed: if the majority is closed they are exempt [from tzitzit] while if the majority is open they require tzitzit. And if half is open and half is closed one treats it stringently and it requires tzitzit, but one must not go out [in public domain] wearing it on the Sabbath.
 A kapa[1] which is open, in a way in which it has four corners: if one has affixed astringa[2] to close it up in order to exempt it from tzitzit, it is ineffective unless it fastens for at least half the length and down to the bottom and should also be fastened below the belt in order that the majority should be closed, a majority that appears to the eyes; if not, it is forbidden because of marit ayin[3].
The corners must be squared off and not rounded.
A turban is exempt, even those from the Western lands where both its sides are tossed over their shoulders and body, even though one covers with it one's head and majority [of body] one is exempt, because its main purpose is to cover the head, and the Torah requires "your coverage" but not the coverage of the head.
 A shawl placed on the neck in the kingdom of the land of Israel which is called in Arabic (???), and so too a (???) ones used to place in Spain over their shoulders, are exempt.
Egyptian garments called (???) and so too (???, ???, Kaftanis??? and ???) of Turkey, even if they have four couners, are exempt. (Rema: So too with the garments of the regions of the people of Ashkenaz and Spain, since their corners are not fashioned in a manner that places two before them and two behind them directed against each other, they are exempt).