Mishneh Torah, Daily Offerings and Additional Offerings
משנה תורה, הלכות תמידים ומוספין
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Daily Offerings and Additional Offerings



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7











... And they learned from the oral tradition that it is not Shabbat (that "from the morrow of the Shabbat" is not the weekly Shabbat) but rather the holiday [of Passover]. And so did the prophets and the high courts see in each and every generation, that they would wave the omer on the sixteenth of Nissan - whether it was on a weekday or on Shabbat. And behold, the Torah states (Leviticus 23:14), "Until that very day, you shall eat no bread or parched grain or fresh ears." And [in the Prophets, it] states (Joshua 5:11), "On the day after the Passover offering, on that very day, they ate of the produce of the country, unleavened bread and parched grain." And if you should say that this Passover  came out on Shabbat - like the fools imagine - how could Scripture make the license to eat the new grain dependent on something which is not the main point nor the cause, but rather just happenstance. Rather, since it made it dependent on the morrow of Passover, it is a clear matter that the morrow of Passover is the cause of the license [to eat] the new grain; and we are not concerned about which day of the week it is.

Chapter 8

If they only found two sheep – and if they were to offer them for today’s musaf there would not be enough for tomorrow’s tamid – both options are equally valid. If they offered them for today’s musaf, it is valid, and if they wanted to leave them for tomorrow’s tamid offerings, they could do so.

Chapter 9



Chapter 10






All seven days of the festival, water is poured on the altar. This matter is a Halacha LeMoshe MiSinai. Along with the wine libation that accompanied the daily Tamid sacrifice in the morning, the water libation was performed separately.