Torat HaOlah
תורת העולה
YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
http://www.torontotorah.com

Torat HaOlah

Author's Introduction



Index



Part One



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16




There were 11 kaftorim [on the menorah of the Mishkan], parallel to the Torah’s 11 essentials and roots, as [Rabbi Yosef Albo] the author of the Ikkarim wrote (1:15), “Using this method, we find that the essentials and roots are eleven”... And although HaRav Abarbanel, in his book Rosh Emunah, argued against  those who identify roots and essentials for Torah since we must believe in the entire Torah, his words have neither root nor essential in this. We have seen the Sages say (Makkot 23b-24a), “David came and established the Torah on ten principles, Isaiah came and established it on six, etc.”<br> And the flowers [on the menorah of the Mishkan]  were nine, parallel to nine true beliefs which every person of Torah should believe, such that one who denies any of them is called a “heretic”...

Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19

 To return to our subject, to explain the two flowers on the right and left branches: The flower on the right branch is parallel to belief in Prayer, that one should pray to G-d and not employ any intermediary. This belief is clarified in the book of Bereishit [which is the right branch, as the first chumash]. We find that the patriarchs all prayed to G-d without any intermediary at all. The Sages already said (Berachot 26b), “The prayers were established by the patriarchs”, and we have found that Avraham prayed in the event with Sodom, and Yitzchak prayed for his wife Rivkah, and Yaakov prayed as they taught regarding Bereishit 28:11, “And he was pogeia in the place.” Note: According to the Talmud, Yitzchak’s prayer took place in the field before Rivkah arrived, in Bereishit 24:63. Rabbi Isserles seems to refer to Bereishit 25:21.]<br> This what Yaakov actually meant when he  said (Bereishit 30:1-2), “Am I in the place of G-d, who has withheld, etc.” He meant that one should not place any intermediary between himself and G-d.<br> Therefore Yaakov was angry at Rachel, for she wished to place him between her and G-d, when she said, “Grant me children.” He knew that Rachel was not irrational, thinking that Yaakov could grant children; rather, she meant that he should be an intermediary, and this was what enraged him. All of this is clear.

Part Two

Introduction







Part Three

Introduction







Kabballic Commentary to Barukh SheAmar



Concluding Poems

