Peirush on Mishneh Torah, Foundations of the Torah
פירוש על משנה תורה, הלכות יסודי התורה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Peirush_on_Mishneh_Torah,_Foundations_of_the_Torah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Peirush on Mishneh Torah, Foundations of the Torah



Chapter 1



Halakhah 1



Halakhah 2



Halakhah 3



Halakhah 4



Halakhah 5



Halakhah 6



Halakhah 7



Halakhah 8



Halakhah 9

Rambam's statement is as follows: "If so, what is meant by what is stated in the Torah 'under His feet,' and so on?" The commentary on this statement explains:                 "The Torah was given to the entire Jewish people, men and women, adults and children. And God knows the thoughts [of people], and He knew that since they are physical beings composed of four elements, they cannot comprehend the separate entities with their limited intellects. Therefore, God spoke to them in a language that their minds could tolerate. Afterward, when they contemplate, understand, and grasp the truth of God as much as they are capable, they will know that all these things were expressed only in the form of questions. And regarding this matter, our sages of blessed memory said that the Torah speaks in the language of human beings. Meaning, it speaks to them in their own language so that they can understand it. Since they are physical beings, they cannot comprehend the separate entities with their limited intellects. And since the Scripture uses their language, there is no doubt that it is using metaphor and allegory, as it is stated: 'Have I not made metaphors and similes?'" (Ezekiel 21:5)                                                                            Note: The commentator refers to the Torah using the term "ארז''ל," which stands for "אבות רבי זקנים" (Avot of Rabbi Zechariah), a collection of ancient Jewish texts.
Rambam's statement is as follows: "There is proof for this matter, as one prophet said that he saw the Almighty adorned in a white garment, like white snow, and so on."     The commentary on this statement explains:                  This means that since the prophets described seeing God in various forms, it is clear that He is not a physical being and does not undergo any changes. The phrase 'like white snow' means as white as snow. And the phrase 'wearing red garments, like horses in a winepress' (Zechariah 6:3) means red like red wine. It is a metaphor, comparing it to the effervescence of wine during the fermentation process.