Mishneh Torah, Robbery and Lost Property
משנה תורה, הלכות גזילה ואבידה
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Robbery and Lost Property



Chapter 1

Anyone who robs another of a penny's worth breaks a prohibition, as it is written: "You shall not rob" (Leviticus 19:13).
According to biblical law, it is forbidden to rob the smallest quantity. It is prohibited to rob or defraud even a heathen, an idolater. If a man did rob or defraud him, he must make restitution.
Who commits robbery? One who takes a man's property by force, as when he snatches an object from his hand or enters his premises without permission and takes utensils, or seizes his servant and animal and makes use of them, or enters his field and eats its products, or commits anything of the sort; he is deemed a robber, in the sense that it is written: "He snatched the spear out of the Egyptian's hand" (II Samuel 23:21).
Who commits fraud? One who has come into possession of another person's money with the consent of the owner and detains it by force, and does not return it when the owner demands it. Such is the case if one has a loan or wages due him, and he claims it from the debtor but cannot obtain it from him because he is a violent and difficult man. Relative to this it is written: "You shall not defraud your fellow man" (Leviticus 19:13).
Anyone who commits robbery must return the very object he robbed, as it is written: "He shall restore what he took by robbery" (Leviticus 5:23). If, however, the object is lost or altered, he must pay its value. Whether he has confessed of his own accord, or witnesses have testified that he committed robbery, he is required to repay the capital value only. Even if he took a rafter by robbery and built it into a structure, inasmuch as it underwent no change, biblical law requires that he shall pull down the whole building and give back the rafter to its owner. The sages, however, have ruled for the benefit of repentant sinners, that he may repay its value and does not have to demolish the structure. The same is applicable to all similar cases. Even if one took a rafter by robbery and used it for the <i>sukkah</i>, and the owner came to claim it during the <i>Sukkoth</i> festival, he has to repay only its value. But if it is claimed after the festival, he must return the rafter itself, inasmuch as it has not been altered and he has not built it in with mortar.



Anyone who covets the male or female servant or the house or goods of his neighbor, or anything that he can buy from him, and he exerts friendly pressure and annoys him until he buys it from him, even for a high price, breaks the prohibition: "You shall not covet" (Exodus 20:17).— —

Chapter 2



Chapter 3















If one borrows an article without the owner's knowledge, he is deemed a robber. If the owner's son or servant held in his hand an instrument, and a man took it from him and used it, he is like one who borrows an article without its owner's consent, and it is deemed to be in his care so that he is responsible for any accident befalling it until he returns it to the owner. Accordingly, if he has returned it to the minor in whose hand it was, or to the servant, and it has been lost or broken, he must pay for it. So too, in all similar cases.
If one seizes a pledge from a debtor's hand without the permission of a court, he is deemed a robber, even though the other owes him money. It is needless to say that if one enters another's home and seizes a pledge, he is deemed a robber, as it is written: "You must stand outside" (Deuteronomy 24:11).

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7

Anyone who owes money to his fellow Jew and denies it, and swears falsely, must repay the capital value which he has denied, plus the added fifth part [of the amount as a penalty]. He must also bring an offering, known as the guilt-offering for robbery.
The same law applies to one who robs, defrauds, steals, or denies that someone lent him or deposited with him, or that he is in possession of a lost object, or that he detains some of the joint property of a partnership, or fails to pay the amount due for work that has been done for him. In sum: Anyone who would be legally obligated to pay if he confessed must repay the capital amount, plus a fifth part [twenty percent of the amount] if he denies on oath, as it is written: "If he deceives his neighbor in a matter of deposit…" (Leviticus 5:21).





If one takes an oath, denying money that is due, he does not have to pay the fifth part unless he confesses of his own accord. But if witnesses came and he persists in denying, he has to pay only the capital value, on the testimony of the witnesses; he does not have to pay the fifth part, since the fifth part and the offering are intended as an atonement, and he is to provide them only upon self-confession.

Even if one has restored all that he robbed with the exception of a penny's worth, he is obligated to take it to the person robbed. He should give it neither to the son of the man robbed nor to his agent, unless the robbed man made him his agent in the presence of witnesses. If a man brings what he has robbed, plus the fifth part, to the law court of his town, he may offer the guilt-offering, and he obtains atonement; the court takes care of it until it reaches its owner. So too, he may give it to an agent of the court. Anyone who gives what he has robbed, and the like, to the law court has discharged his duty.

Chapter 8














No fifth part is added in the case of slaves, bonds, or landed property, as it is written: "If he deceives his neighbor in a matter of deposit…" (Leviticus 5:21). Everything spoken of in this context is movable property with an intrinsic value. Excluded are landed property and slaves, who are placed on an equality with landed property; bonds are excluded, since they have no intrinsic value.— — Title to land can never be acquired by a robber; it always remains in the legal possession of its owner. If the land has been sold to a thousand people, one after another, and the owner has given up hope of recovery, it must go back to the robbed one without payment. The person parting with it has a claim against the one who sold it to him, who in turn has a claim against the previous seller, and so on until the one who bought it from the robber makes claim and exacts payment from the robber.— —

Chapter 9



Chapter 10

If a violent heathen took Jewish property by force, entering a field because its owner owed him a debt, — — and after seizing the field he sold it to another Jew, the owner cannot recover it from the buyer.

When heathen oppress a Jew and seek to slay him, until he gives up his field or his house to save himself, — — if the oppressor is willing to sell the land, and the original owner can afford to buy it back, he has precedence over anyone else. But if the owner cannot afford to buy it, or if the oppressor kept the land for twelve months, anyone who has bought it first from the oppressor has gained title to it, provided that he gives the original owner a quarter of the land or a third of the price he has paid, since the oppressor sells cheaply. Because he sells land that is not his, he sells it for some twenty-five percent less, and this quarter belongs to the original owner; it is sold cheaply because it is his. Accordingly, anyone who buys from the oppressor for thirty must give the owner ten, or a quarter of the land, and then he acquires title to all the rest. If, however, he has not given, then one-fourth of the land in his possession has the status of robbed property.

Chapter 11

The restoration of lost property to a Jew is a positive command, as it is written : "You shall surely take them back to your brother" (Deuteronomy 22:1). Anyone who sees the lost property of a Jew and ignores it, and leaves it there, breaks a prohibitive command as well as a positive command, as it is written: "You must not withhold your help from any ox or sheep of your brother which you see gone astray" (Deuteronomy 22:1). If he has restored it to the owner he has carried out a positive command.















Anyone who follows the good and upright path, and does more than the strict requirement of the law, should restore lost property under all circumstances, even if the act detracts from his dignity.

If one noticed lost property and his father told him "do not restore it," he must return it and should not obey him. For, if he obeyed his father, in fulfillment of the positive command <i>honor your father</i>, he would thereby nullify the positive command <i>you shall surely take them back</i>, and transgress <i>you must not withhold your help</i>.
If one sees flooding water threatening to destroy the building or field of somebody else, he must restrain and prevent it, as it is written: "So you shall do with any lost thing of your brother" (Deuteronomy 22:3), including loss of his landed property.

Chapter 12



Chapter 13

If one finds lost property which he must restore, he is obligated to advertise and let it be known and say: "Whoever has lost a certain kind of object, let him come to identify it and receive it." He must announce it even if it was worth a penny at the time it was found and has since been reduced in value. There was a high rock outside Jerusalem where lost and found things were announced.
How should one make the announcement? If one has found money, he should announce: "Let anyone who has lost a coin come and identify it and get it." So too, one should announce: "Let anyone who has lost a garment, an animal, or documents, come and present identification marks and take them." He need not worry about making known the kind of lost property, because he is not supposed to return it unless he is given decisive marks of identification.

In olden times, anyone who lost property and came and presented its identification marks, it was restored to him, unless he was known to be a swindler. But when the deceivers became plentiful, the court instituted that the claimant should be told: "Bring witnesses that you are not a fraud and take it."
We may rely and base a legal decision upon definite marks of identification under all circumstances, according to biblical law. Size, weight, number, or the place where the object was lost are considered sure marks of identification.
If two individuals came and each gave the same marks of identification, the finder should not give it to either of them, but it must be left intact until one admits to the other or until they make a settlement. If one of them presented identification marks and the other brought witnesses, he must give it to the one with witnesses. If one presented identification marks and the other presented identification marks and one witness, the witness is considered nonexistent, and the finder leaves it undisposed.


After the destruction of the Temple, the sages ruled that lost and found articles should be announced in synagogues and schools. But when oppressors increased and declared that anything found belonged to the king, the sages ruled that it was enough if the finder let it be known among his neighbors and acquaintances.
If the finder made it known that he had found something and the owner did not appear, he must keep it with him until Elijah shall come. As long as the lost article is in his possession, the finder is held responsible if it gets stolen or lost. If it meets with an accident, however, he is exempt. The guardian of lost property is considered a paid guardian, because he is released from many positive commands as long as he is fulfilling the precept of taking care of it.
The finder must examine and inspect the lost article so that it does not deteriorate of itself, as it is written: "You shall give it back to him" (Deuteronomy 22:2); that is, be careful how you restore it to him.— —
If one has found wooden utensils, he should use them to prevent them from rotting. — — Silverware should be used with cold water but not with hot, because he might tarnish them.— —
If one has found scrolls he should read them once every thirty days; and if he cannot read, he should at least unroll them every thirty days. But he must never learn anything from them for the first time, nor read any section and repeat it, nor read a section and translate it, nor open them at more than three columns. Nor should two persons read on two different subjects, lest they pull each in a different direction and the scroll becomes worn ; but two may read on one subject. Three persons may not read in a scroll, even on the same subject.

Chapter 14


This is the general rule concerning lost property: If anything without a mark of identification was lost and the owner was aware of its loss, it is assumed that the owner has given up hope of recovering it — — and it therefore belongs to the finder.
Anything that has an identification mark, such as a garment or an animal, it is taken for granted that the owner has not given up hope of recovering it — — and therefore the finder must announce it, unless he knows that the owner has abandoned hope of its recovery. If, for instance, he heard the owner say: "Alas, what a loss of money," or if the owner used a similar expression, showing that he has given it up, the lost article belongs to the finder.

Unconscious resignation, even when the lost object has no mark of identification, is not considered abandonment of hope of recovery. If, for instance, one dropped a denar without being aware that he dropped it, although he is likely to abandon hope of its recovery upon noticing that he dropped it, it is not deemed abandonment of hope as yet, until the owner is aware that it fell out [and disappeared]. If, however, the owner still says: "I may have given it to so-and-so," or "it is lying in the chest," or "I may have made a mistake in figuring," or something like this, it is not regarded as abandonment of hope.






If one finds earthen jars and pottery that are identical in form, they belong to him if they are new, since they are like any one of the denars without a mark of identification, which the owner cannot recognize; he cannot know whether this jar or flask belongs to him or to somebody else. If, however, they are old utensils which the owner has seen long enough to recognize them by sight, he must announce them. If a scholar comes and declares: "Even though I cannot identify this jar, I can recognize it by sight," he must show it to him. If he recognizes it and says: "It is mine," it must be returned.
This applies only to a distinguished scholar who never deviates from the truth except in promoting peace, — — who has promoted peace between fellow men by adding or omitting facts in order to make them friendly to one another; such misrepresentation is permissible. But if witnesses appeared and testified that he misrepresented in other matters, lost property should not be returned to him merely by virtue of recognition by sight.

Chapter 15



Chapter 16







If one has found treasures in a heap of stones or in an old wall, they are his, since we should assume that they belonged to the ancient heathen. This is so, provided that he finds them deep down, like all ancient treasures. But if it looks likely that they are recently-concealed treasures, or even if he has doubts about it, he must not touch them, for they may have been placed there.

Chapter 17

Wherever we have said that a found article belongs to the finder, he does not gain possession of it until it reaches his hand or his premises. But if a man noticed lost property, and even fell upon it, and another came and seized it, he that seized it has acquired title to it.
If, riding an animal, a man saw lost property and said to his friend: "Acquire title to it for me," as soon as the other picked it up for him, the rider acquired title to it even before it reached his hand. But if the rider said to his friend: "Give it to me," and the latter took it and said: "I have acquired title to it," he has acquired title to it indeed by taking it. If, however, after having given it to the rider he said: "I acquired title to it first," he said nothing at all [to his advantage; his claim is invalid].





A man's courtyard can acquire property for him without his knowledge, and if a lost object fell in there, it belongs to the owner of the courtyard.— —

Chapter 18









If one has found a deed of gift, [the law is this]: If the donor made the gift while in good health, the finder should return it neither to the donor nor to the donee, even if both admit that the deed is valid. For the donor may possibly have written the deed for the purpose of presenting the gift to the named donee but failed to do so and, instead, sold the field or gave it to another person but has now retracted. The reason he admits having made the gift to this one is that he plans to defraud the last party to whom he gave or sold the field. If, however, the gift was made when the donor was on the verge of death, [the law is this]: If he admits that it is valid, the finder should return it to the donee ; if not, he should not return it, because if a person on the verge of death has given property to two people, one after the other, the second one gains title to it, as will be explained.




All lost documents that legally are not to be returned are valid if the finder has returned them, and they are enforceable and must not be taken away from their possessor. They are presumed to be valid and are not subject to suspicion.