Mishneh Torah, Robbery and Lost Property
משנה תורה, הלכות גזילה ואבידה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Robbery and Lost Property



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5

It is forbidden to buy from a thief something stolen, and forbidden to dress it up with a modification so as to buy it. Anyone who does this, and other things like this, strengthens the hands of transgressors and [doing so] transgresses "do not put a stumbling block in front of  the blind" (Lev. 19:14)








If the tax collectors took his cloak and returned to him a different one (took his donkey and returned a different donkey) - Behold, those [switched properties] are his because this is like a sale, and there is presumption of despairing of ownership by the [original] owners, and he does not know with certainty that this was stolen. And if he is established, and strict with himself, he returns [the things] to the original owners.
When is the previous case applicable? When the tax collector is like a robber, like when an idolater or the tax collector that is standing above him or the one sent by the king, and there is no limit, rather, he takes as much as he wants and gives [to the king] as much as he wants. But the tax established by the king, and is he said he should take a third or a fourth, or any amount with a limit. And [if] he appoints a Jew to collect this part for the king and it is known that this person is trustworthy, and he does not add anything over what the king has decreed, he is not under the assumption that he is a robber, since the law of the king is law. Not only that, but one who transgresses and smuggles from this tax is stealing from the king, whether the king is an idolater or a Jewish king.
And so too a king who put a tax over the inhabitants of a city, or over each and every person, a predictable thing of every year; or over a field, something predictable. Or if he decreed that everyone who passes over this thing, all his possessions will be taken to the house of the king. Or that every person who is found in the field at the time of working the threshing floor will pay a tax whether he is or not the owner of the field - and all cases similar: this is not theft, and a Jew that is collecting those for the king is not under the assumption of being a thief, and he is a "kosher" person - provided that he does not add, nor change, nor get anything for himself.

The general principle is: Any law that a king decrees to be universally applicable, and not merely applying to one person, is not considered robbery. But whenever he takes from one person alone in a manner that does not conform to a known law, but rather seizes the property from the person arbitrarily, it is considered to be robbery. Therefore, the king's dues collectors and his officers that sell fields with a defined tax on the fields, their sale is valid. But a personal tax is only collected from the person himself, and if they sold the field with a personal tax, behold this is not a valid sale unless the king has decreed that it is.


[In the case of] a king who cut down trees belonging to individual property owners and made a bridge out of them, it is permissible to cross the bridge. So too if he destroyed homes to make a path or a wall, one is allowed to benefit from it. And so it is for all similar circumstances, for the king's law is the law.
In what instances does this principle [the king's law is the law] apply? When the king's coins are accepted throughout those lands [under his control], for the residents of that country have agreed to him and have accepted that he is their master and they are to him as slaves. But if his coins do not circulate, he is like a robber by force and like a band of armed thieves whose laws are not enforced, and such a king and all his servants are considered thieves in all matters.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8

When a person robs from another, the the person robbed dies: that which is stolen shal be returned to the heirs.  And if the stolen object was either lost or altered: the heirs shall be given its value.  And if [the robber originally denied the crime], took a [false] oath to that effect, and afterwards the person robbed died: he must pay to the heirs both the principal and an additional fifth.

Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11












When a lost article is not worth a p'rutah, the finder is neither obligated to concern himself with it, nor to return it.




One who wishes to go on a good and upright path and go beyond letter of the law should return a lost item in any place even if it is not befitting his dignity.

Chapter 12


If he chanced upon [both] the lost object of his teacher and the lost object of his father - if his father was equal to his teacher [in wisdom], his father's takes precedence, but if not his teacher's takes precedence.  And this is characteristic of his teacher, that he learned the majority of his Torah wisdom from him. 











When a ship was traveling in the sea and a decision was made to reduce its cargo because waves threatened to sink it, the calculation is made according to the weight of each person's goods and not their value. One should not, however, deviate from the standard practice followed by seamen.

Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15

Whenever a person finds an article that appears to have been intentionally placed down, it is forbidden for him to touch it. This applies whether or not it has a mark by which it can be identified. The rationale is that perhaps the owner of the article left it there until he returns. Thus, if the finder takes it he will have ill-treated the owner. If the article does not have a mark by which it can be identified, he has purposefully caused his colleague financial loss, for the article does not have a mark that will enable it to be identified and returned. Even if it has a mark, he has wronged him, for he has troubled him to search for the article and identify it by its marks. Therefore, it is forbidden for the finder to touch it, unless it appears to have fallen. Even if the finder is in doubt and does not know whether the article was lost or placed down, he should not touch it. If he transgressed and took it, he is forbidden to return it to its place. If it is an article that does not have a mark by which it can be identified, the finder acquires it; he is not obligated to return it.






If one finds scattered produce in the manner of being [intentionally] placed, he should not touch them; in the manner of being dropped, they are surely [the finders]. And likewise if he found small bundles of sheaves in a public area. As behold there is no identifying mark upon them.  Or if he found round cakes of figs, bread of a baker, strings of fish, cuts of meat, unprocessed wool fleeces that are coming from their state, flax stalks or strips of combed purple wool, they are surely his - since they do no have an identifying mark upon them. But if they do have an identifying mark upon them, he takes it and announces [its finding]. For an identifying mark that may get trampled is [considered] an identifying mark,


......
If one found scattered produce located on threshing floors: if they were like a <i>kav</i> within four cubits or more by four cubits, they are surely [the finders] - since the owners will not deal with their collection. If they were scattered within less than four cubits, he should not touch them, lest the owners placed them there. If they were like half a <i>kav</i> within two cubits or two <i>kav</i> within eight cubits or the <i>kav</i> was of two or three types such as dates, sesame [and pomegranates] - all of these are [cases of] doubt. Hence he should not take [them], but if he did take them, he is not obligated to announce [their finding].

Chapter 16








Since a person's domain can acquire property on his behalf without his knowledge, as will be explained, why does the owner of this courtyard not acquire the treasure buried within the old wall even if it originally belonged to the Amorites, and thus he would become its legal owner?
The rationale is that the treasure was not known about by him or by others. Thus, it was "lost to him and to all others." Therefore, it belongs to the finder.
Our Sages derived this concept as follows: With regard to a lost object, the Torah Deuteronomy 22:3 states: "That is lost by him and found." This refers to an article that the owner lost, but others can find, thus excluding an article that fell into the sea and is "lost to him and all others." Surely, this applies to an ancient treasure that the person never owned. It is certainly "lost to him and all others." Therefore, it belongs to the finder.

Chapter 17








A persons courtyard acquires for him, without his knowledge. So if a lost object falls into it, the owner of the courtyard acquires it. But this is only when its (the courtyard) is watched. 