Eliyahu Rabbah on Mishnah Negaim
אליהו רבא על משנה נגעים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Eliyahu Rabbah on Mishnah Negaim





Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

in germuni: This is a man from the sons of Gomer, as we said in Yoma, "Gomer, this is Germamya", and we read "Germanya", and likewise it is in Yalkot. And that is that the sons of Noah, dwelt in the three directions of the world Shem in the east Yefeth, in the north, Ham in the south, and because the sun in the south is very low, the people that dwell there are black. And Kush is from the sons of Ham and dwell, at the end of the south, therefore they are very black from the heat of the sun and the people of Japheth dwell in the north and far away from the sun therefore they are white. And Gomer dwells at the end of the north therefore they are the very white. And in the negro that is very black weak looks strong and in the germuni that is very white strong looks weak. And these Tanas in this they argue. One verse says "in the skin of his flesh" and one verse says "in the skin of the flesh". Tana Kama interprets the verse of "in the skin of his flesh", that after his flesh of that is seen we go, and in strong germuni it appears weak to make it lenient, and they exempt him, and in the negro, it appears strong, and we lock him up to be stringent. And Rabbi Ishmael, Rabbi Akiva, and the sages, interpret to the verse of "the skin of the flesh" that after the flesh of a medium person we go. And with what makes one pure, makes pure all of them. And with what makes one impure, makes impure all of them.  But R. Ishmael opined that we surround the  lesion from outside with an eshkroa'a wood, which is of medium appearance, and R"A opined that it should be surrounded with a medium ointment from the outside. And the sages opine that we surround the lesion from the outside with a medium person. And R. Yehuda interpreted to both verses to lenience. In a germuni, "in the skin of his flesh", to lenience, in a negro, "in the skin of the flesh" of a medium person to lenience: