Mishnat Eretz Yisrael on Pirkei Avot
משנת ארץ ישראל על משנה אבות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Mishnat_Eretz_Yisrael_on_Pirkei_Avot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Mishnat Eretz Yisrael on Pirkei Avot

Introduction

**Introduction**
*Avot* is one of the highlights of Israel's wisdom—a collection of teachings that address wisdom, knowledge, and ethics, shaping and reflecting the social and conceptual profile of the thoughts of the Sages (Chazal). Later interpretations obscured some of the innovative elements and striking approaches of the tractate. In subsequent commentaries, starting with the Midrash (especially in *Avot deRabbi Natan*), some of the maxims were softened and shaped to align more with the prevailing thought in Judaism. Examples of this can be found throughout the tractate, such as in Perek 1, Mishnah 6: “Make for yourself a master and acquire for yourself a friend”; Perek 1, Mishnah 5: “Do not prolong the conversation with a woman”; Perek 3, Mishnah 4: “Divert your heart to leisure”; and in Perek 2, Mishnah 14, where it is added “to study Torah.” In all these cases, a general maxim was directed toward the context of the *Beit Midrash*, which was the focus of the Sages, rather than necessarily of the broader people. This process of adapting general maxims to specifically fit the *Beit Midrash* began in the Mishnah itself, continued in *Avot deRabbi Natan*, and was intensified by the commentators.
The tractate of *Avot* is a culmination both in its moral content (which, naturally, is a subjective evaluation), as well as in its pathos and conceptual depth. Most formulations are brief (and in the first chapter, which is the core of the tractate, they are especially short).
The tractate of *Avot* is the most studied of the Mishnah. This is due to two factors. The first is the custom of studying the Mishnah on summer Saturdays. In various Jewish communities around the world, there are different customs regarding when exactly to study the Mishnah, but traditionally, it is included in the prayer services. Many Jews recite the Mishnah as part of their prayer, but there have always been some who studied or explained it. Rabbis and Torah masters taught the Mishnah, each in their own way, and thus dozens of commentaries were written on it, taking different directions. Few of these commentaries have been mentioned in the literature list. The second factor is the "light" content of the Mishnah. The tractate of *Avot* contains words of wisdom and ethics but does not deal with *halakhah* (Jewish law). For the masses of Israel, non-legal material was easier to learn and memorize. Although, traditionally, the study of *halakhah* was given great priority, the tractate of *Avot* was an exception, as it was included in the Mishnah, making it a fundamental part of Jewish education, much more than mere chapters of the Mishnah.
Also in modern times, commentaries, introductions, and research have been written on the tractate of *Avot* (Dinor, *Avot*; Sharbait, *Avot*; Troper, *Avot*). The central issue in the interpretive and academic literature is that many of the authors used the tractate as a platform to project and reflect their own worldview. The authors did not see themselves only as interpreters of the past but as guides for the present, and, as such, they directed the Mishnah toward their own worldview. If this was not done intentionally, then the reality of their world influenced them without them realizing it.
Our goal is different. The stated goal of our interpretation is to reflect the worldview that is expressed in the Mishnah. A student who learns the Mishnah soon notices that it has a single editor who organized and compiled the materials it contains, but the editing did not seek to harmonize the different opinions. In the Mishnah, there are distinct positions on fundamental philosophical issues, and the editor did not want to present a uniform conceptual position. For example, there are differing opinions on the doctrine of reward (see our explanation in Perek 2, Mishnah 2; Perek 3, Mishnah 15) or on the attitude toward work, where also diverse opinions are expressed (see our explanation in Perek 1, Mishnah 20).
There are no stories in it, no *halakhic* questions (only rhetorical ones), but there is a literary structure (especially in the early chapters), a structure that in itself conveys an educational message, which will be discussed further. Dispute is the heart of learning, and the editor did not want to soften this impression. Furthermore, the terms in the Mishnah are not uniform. For example, the concept of "Torah." Sometimes it means the observance of the *mitzvot* in general, as in the phrase “The world is sustained by three things: by the Torah…” (Perek 1, Mishnah 2), and other times it means the study of the Torah.
At this point, I must add a personal confession that applies to the entire Mishnah but is especially true in the tractate of *Avot*.
During the explanation, we try to follow the original meaning of the maxims, as well as their meaning in the editor’s conception. Generally, there is no clear separation between these two meanings, although it is possible that the maxim, in its original context, perhaps had a different meaning. The very placement of the maxim in an alternate location may also give it a different meaning. For example, in *Avot deRabbi Natan*, many maxims are transferred from the general world to the world of the *Beit Midrash*, and thus the subject to whom the author addresses is not just a good Jew but the student. We see this as evidence of an internal process through which the society of scholars passed, from a group integrated with the people to a leadership group that sees itself responsible for the entire people and already has (or also) its own needs and desires. I do not deny that, probably, my worldview influenced my choice between the various interpretations and also in suggesting “new” interpretations (such as in the famous maxim “Do not prolong the dialogue with a woman...,” but also in other maxims that touch on the foundations of my worldview). I have strived to distinguish my worldview from that of the author. My general conception of Judaism, which has a conceptual pluralism (especially in the field of thought), facilitated my determination that if I think differently from the author, I do not need to invalidate my position or force an interpretation of the Mishnah to fit my opinion. On the contrary, I can highlight the differences between the Tanaim themselves and also between the Tanaim and my (or our) positions today. I do not hide my personal opinions, but they are not the goal of this work, and I am not sure they are important enough to be presented to the public. In the explanation, we try to interpret with the utmost understanding and sensitivity what the author meant.
The text of the tractate of *Avot* also constitutes a section in itself. Since the tractate of *Avot* was included in the *Sidurim*, many texts have survived in manuscripts, especially in the literature of the *Rishonim*. The amount of textual variations in the tractate of *Avot* is greater than in any other tractate of the Mishnah. We were fortunate that this is also one of the few tractates that received a scientific edition, which spared us many hours of verification in the different manuscripts.
For me, the explanation of the tractate of *Avot* is the fulfillment of a personal and family dream. When my father and I began to explain the Mishnah, we dreamed of the day we would comment on the tractate of *Avot*. We studied the tractate several times during my childhood, and the first impressions I had of it were formed early on. We did not have the opportunity to comment on the Mishnah as a group of scholars, and this task was left to me. In addition to all the interpretative literature, I had at my disposal a family treasure. Many years before, my father and my sister dreamed of writing a commentary on the tractate of *Avot*. For this, they recorded a dialogue between them, where my father, z"l, taught my sister Chana, z"l, the Mishnah. Chana asked wise questions, and my father responded with his great wisdom. These recordings were at my disposal when writing the commentary for the Mishnah. I called these recordings “Sifra and Oral Sifra.” However, the responsibility for writing the commentary, and for the mistakes, is obviously mine.

Preface



Section 1



Section 2



Section 3























































Chapter Five has a completely different style. This chapter is entirely aggadic and is in the usual style of aggadot in the Mishnah. It is built upon an order of descending numbers. Numerical introductions have been dealt with in detail in the course of our commentary on Trumot 1:1, Shevuot 1:1, Negaim 1:1, and elsewhere. There is no doubt that the numerical style serves the needs of memorization. However, it is not always only directed at this from the outset. In the case before us, counting represents a principled approach, which we will explain in each mishnah. The aggadot in the chapter are complex and complementary from the storyline perspective. Take, for example, the count of ten miracles that happened in Jerusalem (Avot 5:1): The one who made this count already knew about individual miracles. But he then grouped them together and added that they were ten, a count which symbolizes a complete work. In contrast, the one that counted four character traits in a person (Avot 5:10-15) purposefully gathered four angles, in order to hint that he dealt with all the possibilities about this (with all sides of the square).





Bibliography

