Hasagot HaRamban al Sefer HaMitzvot
השגות הרמב"ן על ספר המצוות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Hasagot HaRamban al Sefer HaMitzvot

Introduction



I come with my wish to learn from those who have come before, to confirm their rules, and to wear them as adorning jewels; but I shall not be a dumb mule and carry their books like a fool. I shall explicate their methods and assess their worth. But if my thoughts cannot abide them, I shall humbly take issue with them, and judge as my eyes are given to see, with the clear legal vision given to me. I shall not show favoritism to received teaching. For God grants wisdom in all ages and days, and withholds not grace from those who walk in God's ways. 

Shorashim



Hakdama Lepirtey Hamitzvot



Mitzvot Ase List



Mitzvah 1


... in the words of our Rabbis OBM it is explicit that *he accepts His kingship YT3LH* and *is belief in divinity*, it says in Mechilta "Don't have other gods 3L PNY why because he said I am Hashem your god, parable to a king that enters a land the servents say to him decree for them decrees he says to them not until they accept my kingship will i decree for them decrees because if my kindhsip they don't accept how will they fulfill my decrees, thus says the omnipresent to Israel I am Hashem your god, you accepted my kingship in Egypt, they said as they accepted my kingship so to the will accept my decree have no other. it appears to the baal halachot not to count this in 613.

Mitzvot Ase



Critic on Mitzvot Lo Taase



Mitzvot Lo Taase



Mitzvah 1



Mitzvah 2



Mitzvah 3



Mitzvah 4



Mitzvah 5



Mitzvah 6



Mitzvah 7



Mitzvah 8



Mitzvah 9



Mitzvah 10



Mitzvah 11



Mitzvah 12



Mitzvah 13



Mitzvah 14



Mitzvah 15



Mitzvah 16



Mitzvah 17


We should be careful to not feel pained by giving tzedaka to the poor, nor should we give stingily, nor think of it as below us. Rather this should be in our eyes a merit, a benefit and an addition to his income, since God, Blessed be He, will compensate us in multiple ways......

Ending

