Vayikra Rabbah
ויקרא רבה
Dr. Tziporah Lifshitz
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1mXKtUeaJAYlcYq04ML0zpj9w651UJ6O8tlkqX2mx5-Q/edit?usp=sharing

Vayikra Rabbah



Chapter 1

And He called to Moshe. Rabbi Tanchum Bar Chanilai opened: Bless the LORD His emissaries powerful ones who fulfill His word [to hear His word.] (Psalms 103:20) About whom is the verse speaking? If the verse is speaking about the higher beings, has it not already been stated Bless the LORD, all His hosts, [His servants who do His will.] (Psalms 103:21) If the verse is speaking about the lower beings, has it not already been stated "Bless the LORD His emissaries ..."? Behold, because the higher beings are able to accomplish the errands of the Holy One, blessed be He, it says "Bless the LORD, all His hosts ..." But the lower beings, since they are not able to accomplish the errands of the Holy One, blessed by He, hence it states " Bless the LORD, His emissaries ..." and not all of His emissaries. Another explanation, the prophets are called angels. So is it written “We cried to the LORD who heard our plea and He sent an angel and He took us out of Egypt. [Now we are in Kadesh, the town on the border of your territory.] (Numbers 20:16) Was it an angel of the LORD, and was it not Moshe? And so, why is he called an angel? Rather, from here the prophets are called angels. Likewise, And an angel of the LORD came up from Gilgal to those who were crying [and said, “I brought you up from Egypt and I took you into the land that I had promised on oath to your fathers" and I said, "I will never break My covenant with you."] (Judges 2:1) Was it an angel of the LORD and was it not Pinchas? And so why was he called an angel? Rabbi Simon said: When Pinchas had the holy spirit come upon him, his face would burn like torches. And our rabbis said: Manoach's wife said to him: The woman went and told her husband, [Behold] a man of G-d is coming towards me and his appearance is like the appearance of an angel of G-d, [awesome. I did not ask him where he was from, nor did he tell me his name.] (Judges 13:6) She thought that he was a prophet and he was actually an angel. Rabbi Yochanan said: "From their essence, the prophets were called angels." Accordingly, it is written And Chaggai, the angel of the LORD in the service of the LORD [to the people said, “I am with you—declares the LORD.”] (Haggai 1:13) Perforce you learn that from their essence, prophets were called angels. [Bless the LORD, O His emissaries,] powerful ones who fulfill His word, [ever obedient to His bidding.] (Psalms 103:20) About what is the verse speaking? Rabbi Yitzchak said: The verse is speaking about those who observe the sabbatical year. It is customary in the world that a man will fulfill a commandment for a day, for a Shabbat, for a month, but for the rest of the days of the year? And this one watches his empty field, his empty vineyard, and he gives his purse and is silent -- is there one more powerful than this one? And if you would say that it is not speaking about those who observe the sabbatical year, here it states, 'who fulfill His word, and later it states: This is the word of the Sabbatical [he shall release, every possessor of a loan of his hand, what he has lent to his neighbor. He is not to oppress his neighbor or his kin, for the Sabbatical of the LORD has been proclaimed!] (Deuteronomy 15:2) Just like regarding the word that is stated later on, the verse is speaking about those who observe the Sabbatical year, so too the word states here, it is about those who observe the Sabbatical year that the verse is speaking. "Who fulfill His word." Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rav Acha: The verse is speaking about Israel when they were standing in front of Mount Sinai, as they had fulfilling precede hearing and said: Everything that the LORD said, we will fulfill and we will hear." (Exodus 24:7) "... to listen to the voice of His word." Rabbi Tanchum Bar Chanilai said: It is customary in the world that a load that is difficult for one is manageable for two, and for two is manageable for four; and so would a load that is difficult for sixty multitudes be manageable for one? All of Israel was standing in front of Mount Sinai and saying: [Let us not die, then, for this fearsome fire will consume us;] if we continue to listen [to the voice of the LORD any longer, we shall die.] (Deuteronomy 5:22) And Moshe listens to the voice of the word by himself and lives? You should know that it is so, as from all of them He only called to Moshe. Hence it states, "And He called to Moshe."