Tosefta Maaser Sheni (Lieberman)
תוספתא מעשר שני (ליברמן)
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Tosefta_Maaser_Sheni_(Lieberman)
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Maaser Sheni (Lieberman)



Chapter 1

1:1 It is not allowed to sell, pledge, exchange, or use the weight of golden dinars for produce in the status of second tithe. This rule applies even if it is used to deconsecrate other second tithe commodities. Coins in the status of second tithe should not be given to a money-changer for any benefiting purpose or loaned to gain status. However, if the purpose is to prevent them from rusting, it is allowed. Selling it refers to proposing a deal of giving 200 zuz worth of consecrated produce to receive 100 zuz in unconsecrated coin. The act of taking it as a pledge refers to entering the borrower’s house and taking his second tithe as a pledge. 
1:2 Giving it as a pledge should not be interpreted as offering the tithe as a pledge in return for unconsecrated items. Exchange of items should not be performed in a direct barter manner, such as offering wine in return for oil or vice versa. However, it is permissible to partake in an indirect exchange where parties offer what they have in excess to fulfill the other's need, resulting in a mutually beneficial exchange rather than a direct trade.
1:3 Produce with the status of second tithe should not be used on a callous or lichen and should not be made into an amulet.
1:4 The second tithe produce should not be deconsecrated with unminted metal. However, R. Dosa permits its use. For small coins used as tokens in the bathhouse, all agree on not deconsecrating with them.
1:5 It is not allowed to deconsecrate a second tithe with a coin from the Revolt, a coin that is not in circulation, or money not in one's possession.
1:6 Coin from the Revolt and out of circulation refers to coins from the Revolt of Bar Koziba and coins of Jerusalem. These cannot be used to deconsecrate the second tithe. If a coin circulates under the authority of earlier rulers, it is allowed for deconsecration. It is not permitted to deconsecrate with local Palestinian money in Babylonia or Babylonia's money here. If someone here owns Babylonian coins, the second tithe could be deconsecrated with them. The scenario of not deconsecrating with unavailable money includes situations where the coins are hidden in a camp, royal hill country, or wallet fallen into a cistern. 
1:7 A person walking down the road with copper coins should not attempt to deconsecrate them with the copper coins at his house when encountering a thug. However, his words are binding if he went through with it. 
1:8 A person carrying broken jugs of wine or oil should not attempt to tithe for produce at his house. If performed, the untithed produce remains forbidden to eat.
1:9 Wild animals and fowl can be purchased for ordinary meat usage, but they should not be used as peace-offerings. When the ruling came that ordinary meat would make hands unclean, they decided that wild animals should not be purchased for ordinary meat. However, it is permissible to buy fowl for this purpose. R. Eleazar ben Judah from Avelin, however, asserts that even fowl shouldn't be bought for use as ordinary meat, given that the grape-pressing made by ordinary meat eaters is unclean for Holy Things and unclean for the heave-offering.
1:10 In Jerusalem, if a person with second tithe money buys an open jug of wine, he must consume produce of equivalent value to the vessel. For sealed wine jugs, this rule doesn't apply. The rule is exempted for jugs of brine, vinegar, fish brine, oil, and honey whether open or sealed. For other commodities like the broom-shaped twig of the date-palm, wicker-baskets, pomace baskets of dates, regular baskets, it is necessary to consume the equivalent value of the product.
1:11 If a deer is purchased with second tithe money in Jerusalem, there is no need to consume produce in place of the hide. However, if the deer is slaughtered, he has to consume produce in place of the hide.
1:12 It is forbidden to rent houses in Jerusalem to those bringing offerings as these properties are owned by the tribes. R. Eleazar b. R. Simeon adds the prohibition of renting beds too. 
1:13 Innkeepers may forcefully take the unconsecrated hides of sanctified animals if not left behind as gifts by guests. Service-tree and carob tree sprouts can only be bought with second tithe money after they have sweetened. Conversely, colocasia, mustard, lupine, and all other preserved vegetables can be bought with second tithe money regardless of whether they have sweetened. Purchasing safflower seeds with second tithe money is permissible, but these seeds do not contract food impurity. When questioned about the rules of purchasing safflower cakes with second tithe money, R. Yosé recounts a conversation where R. Yoḥanan ben Nuri agrees with R. Ḥalafta's rule that safflower cakes cannot be bought with second tithe money, contrasting R. Aqiba's assertion they can be purchased with consecrated money. 
1:14 Palm pith can be bought with the money of the second tithe while unripe date berries do receive uncleanness even under the same conditions. Rabbi Judah says that the palm pith has a resemblance to wood in all regards except for the fact that it can be purchased with the money of the second tithe. Similarly, the unripe date berries are just like other fruits except that they are exempt from the separation of tithes. According to R. Simeon, saffron cannot be bought with the money from the second tithe as it does not add flavor, it just provides decoration. R. Judah ben Gadish claimed that his father's employees were selling brine in Jerusalem using the kindest money, but this was not considered a conclusive proof as the brine could have had fish in it.
1:15 If a domesticated animal meant for a peace-offering is mistakenly bought with second tithe money outside Jerusalem, its payment must be returned to its original place. On purpose, the animal should be eaten in the Holy Place or Jerusalem. Now if such a thing happens, they should let the animal die. R. Judah clarifies that the return of payment applies if the intention was to buy the animal for a peace-offering but if the intention was to deconsecrate the second tithe money through the animal's purchase, the payment must go back to its original place whether the intent was by mistake or on purpose. The same goes for cases when the purchased animal is blemished or if unclean pieces of fruit were purchased.
1:16 If a log of consecrated wine gets mixed with a log of unconsecrated honey, the new mixture's value is proportionately divided. Similarly, if a cooked dish of consecrated produce is seasoned with unconsecrated spices, the value is proportionately divided as well. However, if an unconsecrated dish is seasoned with second tithe spices, these cannot be released through redemption.
1:17 If second tithe leeks get mixed with unconsecrated leeks, the value increase is divided proportionately.
1:18 Dough baked from second tithe wheat has its value increase divided proportionately. If the bread disintegrates or the dish burns, the value decrease is attributed to the second tithe. Wheat sorted, ground and sifted can be redeemed at the market price of unrefined wheat. R. Yosé posits that if the cost of baking is figured into the price, only wheat is redeemed but not the bread loaves. Where baking cost is not considered, even bread loaves are redeemed at wheat's market price. If second tithe oil is mixed with clumps of unconsecrated spices, the value increase is divided proportionately. R. Yosé adds a general rule: where the volume increase is noticeable, value increase is proportionately divided. If the volume increase is not noticeable, although the valuable benefit is, value increase is accounted only to the second tithe.

Chapter 2

2:1 When a priest’s daughter uses fenugreek as a heave-offering to shampoo her hair, the daughter of an Israelite is not allowed to use the same fenugreek after her. However, the Israelite's daughter can rub her hair against that of the priest’s daughter to benefit from the fenugreek. This fenugreek, being in the state of the second tithe, should be eaten while still in bud. <br>According to the House of Shammai, any use of the fenugreek is in a state of cleanness, while the House of Hillel opines that any use is in uncleanness, except for shampooing. This is reiterated by R. Meir. R. Judah, however, states that except for shampooing with it, the House of Shammai states that any use is in a state of cleanness whereas the House of Hillel proposes that any use is in uncleanness, except for soaking it. <br>Vetches in the state of the second tithe should also be eaten while still in bud. The House of Shammai says they are soaked in a state of cleanness, and crushed and fed to cattle in uncleanness. The House of Hillel, however, believes that they are soaked and crushed in cleanness, and fed to cattle in uncleanness. R. Judah concurs with these words.
2:2 Regarding the soaking of second tithe status dates to produce date-beer or soaking raisins to produce juice, they are instead crushed into puree. Concerning spices in the state of the second tithe, pressing them is permitted as it’s their normal mode of preparation. Yet, if these spices are tied in a bundle and placed in a dish, their usage depends on whether their flavor dissipates. If it does, they are permitted for usage, if not, their usage is prohibited.
2:3 One should not turn wine into oenanthe (an unguent) or oil into spiced oil. However, if it’s done, one can anoint with the oil but should not anoint with the wine or vinegar-made unguent. Anointing is a common use for oil, contrary to wine and vinegar.
2:4 Focusing on unconsecrated coins and those dedicated to the Temple, what one collects is dedicated. This rule is applicable to mixed coins, fruits, pomegranates, or any other items that lose their identity in the mixture. However, for substances that do not intermingle, anything collected is proportionately both consecrated and unconsecrated. Excess items are treated similarly.
2:5 If a sela coin of second tithe status and an unconsecrated one are mixed together, a sela’s worth of copper coins is brought for redeeming the second tithe. There's a debate between Ben Azzai and others whether to bring one or two sela's worth of copper coins for redemption. If an unconsecrated sela and a consecrated one are mixed up, the finer coin from them is selected. If it's consecrated, it remains so, and if not, whatever coin is consecrated is deconsecrated with this coin. The second sela is permitted to be used as an unconsecrated coin.
2:6 If a sela from the second tithe and one consecrated to the Temple are mixed together, a sela's worth of copper coins is brought, and the second tithe sela coin is deconsecrated with these coins. The finer coin is selected with the same reasoning as before, and the second sela is picked up to deconsecrate the copper coins.
2:7 If three coins - a second tithe sela, an unconsecrated sela, and a consecrated sela, are mixed together, the second tithe sela is deconsecrated using a sela's worth of copper coins. The finest sela coin is selected, deemed consecrated if it is and if not, the consecrated coin, wherever it may be, is deconsecrated with it. The second coin is used to deconsecrate the copper coins, and the third, or last coin, is allowed to be used as an unconsecrated coin. <br>It's allowed to deconsecrate copper coins with silver or silver coins with gold out of necessity. However, gold coins cannot be deconsecrated with silver coins. R. Eleazar b. R. Simeon counters by stating that just as silver coins can be deconsecrated with copper coins, gold coins can similarly be deconsecrated with silver coins. Rabbi questions him, asking why silver coins should be deconsecrated with copper coins. R. Eleazar b. R. Simeon further states that gold coins consecrated as second tithe can be deconsecrated with copper coins in Jerusalem, but only in the case of doubtfully tithed produce. For certainly untithed produce, it is prohibited. For doubtfully tithed produce, even edibles can be deconsecrated with other edibles. However, gold coins consecrated as second tithe without redemption methods are not permitted for making utensils. But, if comprised of silver, it is permitted. <br>If the second tithe from doubtfully tithed produce mixes with that from certainly untithed produce, they should be consumed according to the more restrictive rules among them.
2:8 There are certain differences in the treatment of dedicated items and the second tithe. Dedicated items can be deconsecrated by anything whereas the second tithe can only be deconsecrated using coins. Moreover, while dedicated items cannot change their level of sanctity, the second tithe's sanctity level can increase after consecration. Dedicated items can be brought in and taken out of Jerusalem, but once the second tithe enters Jerusalem, it can't be brought out. None of these stringencies apply to dedicated items....
2:9 There is a level of strictness that applies to dedicated items. It's because the status of dedication can apply to anything, the laws of sacrilege apply to it, and it is only permitted for consumption by a non-priest if it has been deconsecrated. This doesn't apply to the second tithe.
2:10 R. Meir notes that silver and produce aren't deconsecrated with silver unless there is a small amount of silver attached to the produce. However, the sages allow for the deconsecration of silver and produce with silver. R. Jacob shares in Meir’s name that a silver sela is exchanged for three dinars of silver and either one dinar’s worth of copper or produce. R. Simeon b. Eleazar adds Shammai the Elder's saying to deposit the produce in a shop and consume its value.
2:11 When someone has two bins, with one for produce considered as a heave-offering and the other for produce considered as second tithe, if pieces of fruit are found between the bins, the status is determined by the proximity of the fruit. If the fruit is nearer to the heave-offering bin, it falls under the laws governing heave-offering; if it's closer to the second tithe bin, it falls under the laws governing second tithe. If the fruit is found halfway between the bins, the restrictive laws of both the heave-offering and the second tithe apply. <br>R. Yosé b. R. Judah explains that if a chest was used for both unconsecrated coins and coins in the status of second tithe, and one found coins in it without knowing their status, the majority situation determines the status of the coins. If most people placed unconsecrated coins in the chest, the coins are deemed to be unconsecrated. If most people placed second tithe coins in the chest, the coins are deemed to be the second tithe. <br>R. Simeon points out similarities between the peace-offering and heave-offering, affirming the analogy and supporting his lenient ruling regarding the purchase of produce in the status of heave-offering with money consecrated as second tithe. <br>R. Simeon b. Judah speaks for R. Yosé and quotes an argument between the House of Hillel and the House of Shammai concerning various aspects of the processing of produce, its status, and its location. Ultimately, according to the House of Hillel, even in the case of completed processed produce, one can separate produce as heave-offering and tithes for another batch. 
2:12 A tree located within Jerusalem, the branches of which extend out of the city bounds has the possibility of redemption for the produce picked from these extended branches. However, if the branch returns inside the city limits, the produce cannot be redeemed. A tree standing outside the city with its branches extending into Jerusalem will not have redeemable tithe produce. But once the branch goes back outside, the second tithe is redeemable. As for buildings that house olive-presses and have their entrances inside the city but their interiors located outside, or those with entrances outside and interiors inside Jerusalem, the interpretations vary. The House of Shammai believes that one cannot redeem produce in such buildings, like those wholly inside the city, and similarly, Lesser Holy Things cannot be consumed inside them like in buildings entirely outside the city. The House of Hillel, on the other hand, believes that the areas of these buildings aligned with the city wall and within are considered as inside the city, whereas the parts opposite the wall and outside are seen as outside the city. Rabbi Yosé claims this is Rabbi Aqiba’s interpretation. According to Rabbi Yosé, the originally held view was that even for such buildings, the House of Shammai would not redeem produce nor consume Lesser Holy Things within. The House of Hillel, however, believes these buildings to be like Temple chambers; the ones opening towards the inside of the city are considered inside, and those opening outward are considered to be outside.
2:13 A Temple chamber located in the holy precinct, which opens to the unsanctified area, is unsanctified in its inner space, while its roof remains sanctified. In such chambers, Most Holy Things are not consumed, Lesser Holy Things are not slaughtered, and it holds no responsibility in terms of ritual impurity.
2:14 A chamber built outside the holy precinct, with its entrance towards the sanctified precinct, should ideally not remain as such. However, its inner space is viewed as sanctified, while its roof is not. In these chambers, Most Holy Things can be consumed, Lesser Holy Things slaughtered, and it holds liability in terms of ritual impurity.
2:15 If a chamber is built in the holy precinct and open to both the unsanctified and sanctified areas, then it is all deemed to be sanctified. Conversely, a chamber built in the unsanctified area and open to both sanctified and unsanctified areas is all deemed to be unsanctified. A chamber built across the sanctified and unsanctified areas, such as the Chamber of Fire, has its inner space and roofs categorized based on direction; the parts that face the sanctified area and inwards are sanctified while those facing the unsanctified area and outwards are unsanctified. The status of the entire chamber is based on the location of its entrance when it comes to eating Holy Things. However, if it concerns matters of uncleanness, the sanctified parts of the chamber are only from the center of the wall inward. The behavior within the chamber also changes if it was built on the wall of either Jerusalem or the Temple courtyard. All of the temple chambers are entirely within the sanctified precinct. R. Yosé says that the scripturally-given borderlines of the Land of Israel are thought to be outside the Land of Israel while R. Eleazar b. R. Yosé counters that they are within the Land of Israel.
2:16 The status of second tithe produce that has been polluted in Jerusalem, regardless of whether it was tainted by a Father of uncleanness or an Offspring of uncleanness, and regardless of whether this occurred inside or outside of Jerusalem, are a matter of debate. The House of Shammai believes that all of it should be redeemed and consumed within Jerusalem. On the other hand, the House of Hillel holds the same position with the exception of items tainted by a Father of uncleanness outside of Jerusalem. These interpretations were shared by R. Meir.  R. Judah puts forth that the House of Shammai only advocates for the consumption within Jerusalem of everything but items tainted by a Father of uncleanness outside of Jerusalem. The House of Hillel, he suggests, believes everything can be redeemed and eaten outside of Jerusalem except for items tainted by an Offspring of uncleanness within Jerusalem. R. Eliezer introduces another perspective, stating that if items are rendered unclean by a Father of uncleanness, regardless of the location, they should be redeemed and consumed outside of Jerusalem. If tainted by an Offspring of uncleanness, regardless of location, the items should be redeemed and consumed within Jerusalem. Adding to this discourse, R. Aqiba posits that items tainted outside of Jerusalem, whether by a Father or Offspring of uncleanness, should be redeemed and eaten outside of Jerusalem. Conversely, items tainted inside Jerusalem by either form of uncleanness should be redeemed and consumed within the city. R. Simeon B. Eleazar points out that the Houses of Shammai and Hillel did not disagree on matters relating to items polluted by a Father of uncleanness outside of Jerusalem or by an Offspring of uncleanness within Jerusalem. These, he says, should respectively be redeemed and consumed outside and within Jerusalem. The disagreements, according to him, concern items tainted by a Father of uncleanness within Jerusalem, and those tainted by an Offspring of uncleanness outside Jerusalem. The House of Shammai believes these items should be redeemed and consumed within Jerusalem, while the House of Hillel suggests they can be consumed anywhere post-redemption. 
2:17 Items that have been purchased with coins designated as second tithe and have since been defiled, should be redeemed. However, R. Judah suggests they be buried instead. To this, he is questioned on whether it is his intention to impose stricter rules on secondary matters than on primary ones. In turn, R. Judah refers to a case where stricter rules are applied to what is deemed secondary. For instance, a substitute offering with a permanent blemish maintains its status of dedication for use on the altar. Yet, an animal originally proposed for dedication loses this status if it develops a permanent blemish. The challengers draw a parallel, saying that just like in the case of the substitute offering where the unblemished ones cannot be redeemed, but the blemished ones can, in matters of buying second tithe, clean items cannot be redeemed, but the unclean ones can.
2:18 When someone lends out jugs to hold wine bought with second-tithe coins, even if the jugs are sealed, the jugs themselves do not acquire the status of second tithe. This specifically pertains to jugs of wine. In contrast, whether sealed or not, jugs of brine, vinegar, fishbrine, oil, and honey are not subjected to the status of second tithe; they are neutralizing agents in a 1:100 ratio mixture with unconsecrated produce; and they do not sanctify any unconsecrated produce in any quantity if mixed. Acquisition of second-tithe status by jugs is dependent on whether all its contents hold second tithe status. If a quarter-log of unconsecrated liquid is left in the jug, regardless of whether the jug is sealed or not, it does not acquire the second tithe status. R. Simeon B. Eleazar establishes that the Houses of Shammai and Hillel did not disagree on the point of a seller needing to only open a cask of pressed grapes, without needing to pour it out, to indicate a desire to sell only the wine and not the cask. Disagreement arises on the matter of one pressing grapes in a vat. The House of Shammai contends that the seller should open the vat and pour its contents back in, while the House of Hillel opines that merely opening the vat is sufficient - no pour back is necessary.


Chapter 3

3:1 When someone transfers produce of a second tithe from an expensive location to a cheaper one, or vice versa, it is redeemed at the rate of the current location. This, as stated by R. Joshua b. Qorḥa, usually applies when the produce has been separated from doubtfully tithed produce. If the produce has been separated from certainly untithed produce, it is redeemed at the higher market price. However, produce in the status of a second tithe is redeemed at its lowest selling price, reflecting what the shopkeeper buys, not sells. R. Simeon b. Eleazar further clarified that this rate is the rate at which the shopkeeper buys produce of the same type.
3:2 When someone sells a silver dinar, which is a second tithe, it is sold at the higher rate at which the shopkeeper purchases products wholesale; not at the lower retail price.
3:3 When buying a gold dinar, which is a second tithe, it is purchased at the higher rate at which the moneychanger sells gold dinars, and not at the lower purchase price.
3:4 R. Judah suggests that one might profit a roba' (half a dinar) when transporting a gold dinar from one place to another, while R. Eliezer limits the potential profit to a silver dinar. When dealing with second tithe produce that has no value, the requirement is to say, “It and its added fifth are deconsecrated with this issur (one-twenty-fourth of a dinar).”
3:5 The value of a second tithe where the worth is unknown is determined by three bidders, not three non-bidding evaluators. This holds true even if one of the bidders is a gentile or the owner of the produce. The owner is obliged to open the bidding and if he states, “Lo, it is mine for an issar,” he is allowed to retract his bid if it is deemed unreasonable. Note that, in this case, the law is stricter for dedicated items than for second tithe products.
3:6 Second tithe items are not redeemed by estimation. For example, if one has deteriorating produce or old coins, one should not ask, “How much is one willing to pay for this collection?” Instead, one should ask, "How much produce is one willing to purchase for a sela'?” or “How many of these coins is one willing to buy for a dinar?” As per the weight of a coin, the amount it may lack before a second tithe may not be deconsecrated with it is outlined by R. Meir as four issars for a sela‘ and an issar for a dinar. However, if the coin weighs less than it should by more than allowed, it is used for deconsecration based on actual weight, not face value.
3:7 If someone sells untithed produce, the seller must take measures to rectify it. If the untithed produce still exists, the seller must separate the tithes. If it no longer exists, the seller has no obligation. If it is unclear, the seller separates the tithes on his own produce to compensate.
3:8 In case of a dispute between a buyer and seller over the tithed status of produce, the seller is forced to tithe his own produce for the buyer. If the royal authorities seize produce, the tithe requirements depend upon the type of seizure. If it was seized to repay the farmer’s debt, he must tithe it; if it was confiscated against his will, he does not have to tithe it.
3:9 As per Rabbi's words, someone who eats second tithe produce inappropriately, whether knowingly or unintentionally, should appeal to heaven for atonement. However, Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel, distinguishes between the two cases, stating that for unintentional consumption, one should appeal to heaven, but in cases of intentional consumption, its value should be repaid.
3:10 This same rule applies when someone mistakenly uses coins that are a second tithe to buy produce to eat. According to Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel, they appeal to heaven if it was a mistake and repay the value if it was on purpose. But, Rabbi suggests that whether the action was intentional or not, its value should be repaid.
3:11 Rabbi discusses the scenario of one who consumes untithed produce that belongs to another individual. According to his opinion, that person must reimburse the value of the untithed produce, including the would-be tithes. In contrast, R. Yosé b. R. Judah asserts that repayment should only cover the cost of the unconsecrated produce. If an Israelite consumes his own untithed produce, he is answerable to heaven. Yet, the priest has no claim against him, as stated in Num. 5:9. The priests can only claim produce after tithe separation. This rule also applies to a Levite that consumes his share before tithe separation. 
3:12 Anyone who transports produce from the threshing-floor to the city and then separates the tithes to give to the priest, Levite, and pauper cannot deduct transport costs since the gifts had no claim before separation. In contrast, if the gifts were designated at the threshing-floor, the transporter can deduct transport costs. If a person sold untithed produce, firstling meat or possibly contaminated wine, the consumed products are considered eaten, and the seller should return the money. R. Simeon b. Eleazar differentiates between disgusting and not disgusting items. If a disgusting item is eaten accidentally, the seller should return the money.
3:13 Various actions involving the second tithe in Jerusalem, such as redemption, separation, deconsecration, and sales, are not permissible in the post-Temple era. Taking the second tithe out of Jerusalem is also not allowed. If someone took the tithe out of the city, it should be left to rot.
3:14 During the present age (the post-Temple era), if coins considered as the second tithe are deconsecrated with produce in Jerusalem, the House of Shammai insists the coins and the produce retain their second-tithe status, but the House of Hillel argues each retains their original status.
3:15 The House of Hillel espouses the view that one separates the first tithe from doubtfully tithed produce, removes its heave-offering, consumes it, and does not need to separate the second tithe. Contrarily, the House of Shammai insist second tithe also needs to be separate, with the rationale: if the second tithe had been removed, the first one surely has been removed, but if the first one has been removed, the second one has not necessarily been removed. 
3:16 R. Eliezer is of the view that a person who separates the second tithe is reliable to have separated the first. However, the Sages argue that such a person is only trustworthy regarding the first tithe if he proves his trustworthiness regarding the second. They further note that if he's reliable regarding the second tithe, he's not necessarily trustworthy with the first.
3:17 If a person declares that the second tithe in a certain item is deconsecrated with a particular coin but fails to specify the location of the tithe, there are opposing views on the validity of the consecration. R. Simeon asserts it is valid while Sages contend it isn't until the location is specified.
3:18 Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel, R. Judah, and R. Yosé visit a householder in Akhzib and question the readiness of his produce. On sensing their concern, the householder presents a chest full of gold dinars, arguing that he deconsecrates his second tithe with these coins. However, the guests inform him that while he may have gained the coins, he has neglected to separate his second tithe properly hence risking his life.
3:19 When a ḥaber dies and leaves produce, it is assumed to be properly tithed, even if he dies on the same day he brought it in from the field.


Chapter 4

4:1 Someone who redeems their own second tithe is obliged to pay an additional fifth. This applies to several circumstances such as, someone who collects untithed produce from their own crop, someone who buys untithed produce, and someone who inherits or is gifted untithed produce. Furthermore, this also applies to someone who buys untithed produce from a gentile or a Samaritan. Essentially, the buyer is required to pay an additional fifth when they redeem second tithe from such produce. 
4:2 To elaborate on the concept of paying an additional fifth: If a person redeems the produce for a sela (four dinars), they then pay five dinars, or twenty-five percent extra. However, R. Eleazar b. R. Simeon holds that anyone who redeems the produce for a sela only pays an extra fifth of a sela, or twenty percent extra. For someone who redeems second tithe, if they want to be meticulous about the coins they receive, they can do so. For instance, if they desecrate second tithe with a sela that turns out to be of poor quality, or with a tressis coin that is also of poor quality, they can exchange the inferior coin for a better one.
4:3 They bypass the second tithe laws to avoid the additional fifth. This is achieved when one tells his grown child or their Hebrew servant or maid, to redeem the tithe with specific coins. Nevertheless, they should refrain from telling them to redeem it on their behalf. R. Joshua b. Qorḥa stated that initially this was the practice. However, with the rise in fraudulence, one would simply tell another person that the produce is a gift, followed by another statement deconsecrating the produce through coins at home. However, one should not make such a statement if the coins are in one's pocket. This is largely dependent on the possessor transferring control of the produce, or renting the storeroom to another person.
4:4 It is permitted to deposit the second tithe with a meticulous observer of purity laws known as a ḥaber, while a doubtful tithe may be deposited with someone laxer with these laws. But Abba Ḥilpai b. Qeruya said that they used to do it but now they cautioned against such practice as the successor of the ḥaber could be unreliable.
4:5 It is considered improper if a farmer sets aside their second tithe's market value without contributing the added fifth. Here, R. Eliezer allows consumption of the produce without consecration whereas the sages advise against it. Rabbi expressed that R. Eliezer's view is preferred for the Sabbath, and the sages' view is preferred during the weekdays.
4:6 For those who fail to set aside the doubtful tithe's heave-offering, R. Eliezer permits the consumption of the produce, whereas the sages do not. Here, R. Yosé indicates that R. Eliezer's ruling is preferable for the Sabbath, whereas the sages' ruling is suited for weekdays.
4:7 Mutual redemption of the second tithe to evade the added fifth is allowed between kinships such as brothers, partners, or father and son. Yet, R. Judah denounced giving a poor man's tithe to one's father. Responding to the objection of both father and son being poor, the statement clarifies that one's wife can even redeem the tithe on his behalf, following R. Simeon b. Eleazar's views. However, the sages disagree, implying that a wife cannot be given a poor man's tithe and thus, cannot redeem the second tithe for him. In tune with this, R. Simeon b. Eleazar states that a wife, although able to redeem the second tithe, can't be given a poor man's tithe.
4:8 One should tithe for a non-observant owner of the produce, regardless of causing potential obstacles for those following the owner. To avoid this, the non-observant would bring the produce outside and ask the diligent one to tithe only the amount that is to be purchased.
4:9 Deconsecrating the second tithe by transferring its status onto coins belonging to a non-observant is permitted, despite leading to potential pitfalls for those who follow him. To ensure this is done correctly, the non-observant should take the coins out of his house and ask the diligent one to deconsecrate the producing using these coins, only for the amount he plans to buy. Of importance is that immediately after purchase, the diligent one should return the change. Acceptance of the coin as debt payment is permitted. However, if it is a loan, it is forbidden, unless the non-observant goes into his house and returns, presumably with a different coin. In the case of a young wholesaler selling in the market, they can be used to separate the second tithe, avoiding the added fifth. This transpires when the farmer gives the wholesaler a tressis, with the designation of the second tithe being needless of the coin's location. Whether held by the buyer, seller, or even dropped into the money purse, the farmer can continuously carry on with designating and selling the tithe. Furthermore, one can bring a coin from their house, transfer the second tithe onto it, go out, return, and finally give the coin back to the wholesaler declaring it as the one used to deconsecrate their produce, thereby avoiding the added fifth.
4:10 If a ḥaber is given ten gold dinars from an ‘am ha’areṣ, to buy the latter's second tithe, he shouldn't utilize all the coins to deconsecrate the ‘am ha’areṣ’s produce. Instead, he should only use one coin for deconsecration. Likewise, if he purchases ten kors of wheat or ten kegs of wine, he should only separate the second tithe for one kor or one keg, respectively. This also applies if he buys ten bundles of greens, where he should separate the second tithe for just one bundle. This aims to avoid cheapening their value by saturating the market with produce in the status of second tithe, which the ‘am ha’areṣ is keen to sell.
4:11 The produce in the status of second tithe should ideally be sold as unconsecrated produce, not as the second tithe. Otherwise, it might be sold at a lower price as buyers are aware that the farmer is eager to sell. If there is a mix of unconsecrated produce and produce in the status of second tithe, the farmer should first sell one type and then the other, depositing the proceeds in two separate money-boxes. If all the produce is sold in one go, the payment should also be received together. The farmer has the discretion to decide the amount to be set aside as unconsecrated or as second tithe.
4:12 If a person declares a sela‘ or a dinar from his pocket to deconsecrate the second tithe, there's a disagreement about the consecration. R. Yosé asserts that the produce has not been deconsecrated, while the Sages posit that it has been. However, R. Yosé agrees with the Sages that if the person declares the new sela‘ or the new dinar from his pocket for deconsecration, it will indeed deconsecrate the produce. Conversely, the Sages concord with R. Yosé in the case where the person says the sela‘ or the dinar previously possessed by his son, will deconsecrate the produce. In such cases, as the coins might not actually be in the son’s possession at that moment, the produce hasn't been deconsecrated.
4:13 There's a provision for the deconsecration process involving future transactions as well. If a person declares that the second tithe's deconsecration will be done with the sela‘ or the tressis received as change from a particular transaction, that does deconsecrate the produce. This is applicable even when selling various types of coin. The person may sell a Tiberian tressis or a dinar to his peer for a Sepphorite tressis, a Tiberian tressis, two dupundia, or two issars. However, this can only be done in situations when the coins were consecrated from doubtfully tithed produce. If the coins were consecrated from certainly untithed produce, it's forbidden. There's also an allowance for deconsecrating copper coins with other copper ones for doubtfully tithed produce. Lastly, R. Yosé adds that in situations of necessity, even coins consecrated from doubtfully tithed produce can be used, but not out of convenience or not in cases of certainly untithed produce. 
4:14 If a person is traveling and carries coins to buy second tithe produce where he currently resides, the value of coins will depend on the traveler’s intent to return or not. If he plans to return to his original place, he uses the coin's value from there. But if not, the local market's value at his current location should be used. R. Yosé, R. Judah, and Rabbi have different opinions on the consecration of separated but yet unmarked heave-offering, or first or second tithe. They argue that it becomes consecrated only after determination or remains unconsecrated, or it depends on the farmer's intention to declare later or not.
4:15 If a traveler, after having eaten against half the value of an issar, moves to another location where its value has doubled, he can eat against another issar. Similarly, if a traveler eats against half the value of a dupundium, and then moves to a location where the value is halved, he can eat against another half. The general rule is, before full redemption, any increase or decrease in value is shared proportionately between the consecrated produce and the consecrated coins. After redemption, any fluctuation is borne solely by the second tithe coins.

Chapter 5

5:1 When discovering a vessel marked with the letters “aleph,” “dalet,” “resh,” or “taw”, denoting the first, prohibited, or consecrated offerings, the produce within is considered heave-offering. If marked with “yod” or “mem,” indicating either ten or tithe, the vessel's contents are perceived to be the first tithe. Meanwhile, if marked with “pe” or “shin”, presumably for redemption or second, the vessel's contents are considered the second tithe. Nonetheless, some sages assert that these letters represent the names of individuals.  Finding a cask brimming with produce and marked with the word 'heave-offering', qualifies its contents as a heave-offering. Similarly, finding a cask inscribed with 'tithe' would denote its contents as the first tithe. Yet, R. Yosé contends that even if a full cask is marked as a 'heave-offering', the fruit within is unconsecrated. He presumes that it was once filled with consecrated produce, later replaced with unconsecrated produce. For newly discovered containers, R. Yosé assumes the same. He also acknowledges that the status of the contents apply if the word is penned on a shard and set on the jar or noted on papyrus and placed over the opening.
5:2 When a clay vessel bearing the inscription “qof” or “offering” is found, R. Meir regards the vessel and its contents as offering. However, other sages argue that it is not customary for people to dedicate a clay vessel as an offering. As for metal vessels inscribed with “offering”, if empty, they are forbidden for use until it is known that the previously dedicated vessel has been redeemed.
5:3 If a clay vessel marked with the inscription “offering” is found, the contents are considered an offering. Similarly, vessels inscribed with the words “tithes for the holy city”, are determined to be in the status of second tithe destined for the holy city. In contrast, those named “for Joseph” or “for Simeon” have no effect on the status of the produce. However, vessels marked with the words “to be brought up to Jerusalem to be eaten” indicate that the contents are unconsecrated.
5:4 If one claims they have second tithe coins in the house that are found in the attic, or vice versa, or coins in a bag found in a chest, or vice versa, these are considered second tithe. 
5:5 When a person asserts that they have coins of second tithe, but these coins are subsequently found within their home, the attic, or a bag or chest, these coins are deemed to be unconsecrated. But should the person claim to have a bag filled with coins of second tithe within their house and instead locate there two or three bags, the largest bag's coins are considered to be of second tithe, while those in the smaller bags are seen as unconsecrated. Consequently, one should not consume the produce bought with coins from the smaller bags until their second tithe status has been transferred to coins from the larger bag.
5:6 If a person declares possession of eight golden second tithe coins in a bag and finds gold dinars instead, they are considered second tithe. However, if they find gold coins, they are unconsecrated. In the event of locating fifty sela's or two hundred zuz and later discovering gold dinars, the dinars are considered the second tithe. 
5:7 However, if one declares possession of eight golden dinars in a bag and then locates fifty sela's or two hundred zuz and later finds gold coins, they are consequently unconsecrated. If someone claims to have a maneh of second tithe and finds two hundred zuz, they are considered unconsecrated according to sages but mixed consecrated and unconsecrated according to R. Yosé. 
5:8 If someone unable to talk due to illness is asked about their second tithe's location and responds by gesturing or nodding their head, they should be questioned three times for verification. 
5:9 If a person wonders about the location of their father's second tithe and receives information in a dream, finding coins there and consulting sages will result in the ruling that they are unconsecrated as dreams bear no efficacy.
5:10 If a person warns their son from touching any coins in a corner, even in the face of death, and coins are later found there, they are considered unconsecrated. 
5:11 If children notice their father concealing coins in a locker, box, or chest, and he claims they belong to a certain person, or are in the status of second tithe, the validity of his statement depends on his demeanor. If he seems to be joking, his claim is disregarded. However, if he appears serious, his claim holds credibility.
5:12 If a person notifies children that he saw their father hide coins denoting a second tithe in a locker, box, or chest, his statement lacks validity. The contents are considered unconsecrated. But, if the person specifies the location or chest where the father kept the coins, the claim is validated, and the coins are thought to be consecrated.
5:13 If a launderer claims, “This cloak was your father’s, but I bought it from him,” he is believed due to the rule that the mouth which forbade is also the mouth which permitted. However, if there were witnesses to the fact that it was his father’s and he stated, “I bought it from him,” he is not believed. Others have specific rules for marking: (1) A tree bearing produce dedicated to the Temple is marked with red dye. (2) A place of idolatrous worship is blackened with charcoal. (3) Wood ash is thrown on a leprous house. (4) A place of execution is marked off with blood. (5) The place where a calf’s neck is broken to atone for an unsolved murder is marked with a circle of stones.
5:14 The produce of a vineyard in its fourth year of growth is brought to Jerusalem if it's grown within a day’s journey of the city in any direction. This is true when the vineyard has at least five vines. But as for a vineyard that doesn't have at least five vines, or likewise as regards groves of other types of trees, this produce, during the fourth year of growth, may be redeemed even if grown a short distance from the wall of Jerusalem. Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel says, “It's the same whether a vineyard has five vines or doesn't have five vines - this produce must be brought to Jerusalem and may not be sold.” When this fruit is brought to Jerusalem, it's divided among his neighbors, relatives, and acquaintances, and used to decorate the public thoroughfare. But, says R. Simeon, there should be no decorating the public thoroughfare with such produce. Rather, he redeems the fruit at the prevailing market value and its proceeds are eaten in Jerusalem just like produce in the status of second tithe.
5:15 After the destruction of the Temple, no initial changes were made concerning the requirement that the fruit from the fourth year of a vineyard's growth be brought to Jerusalem. However, the later court decided that this fruit can be redeemed even if grown close to the city wall of Jerusalem.
5:16 R. Eliezer owned a vineyard on the border of Kefar Tabri to the east of Lod and initially refused to redeem the yield from the vine's fourth-year growth. However, his disciples stated that since the court had decreed the fruit could be redeemed, even if grown near Jerusalem's city wall, he must do so. He promptly harvested the grapes and redeemed them. Likewise, the law governing the yield from a tree's fourth year is like the law of the second tithe.
5:17 When it comes to a vineyard in its fourth year of growth, The House of Shammai states that neither the law of the added fifth nor the law of removal applies, while the House of Hillel insists they both apply. This is during the sabbatical year, but in other years of the sabbatical cycle, both the law of the added fifth and the law of removal apply, says Rabbi. Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel adds that for both the sabbatical year and other years of the sabbatical cycle, the House of Shammai believes neither law applies, while the House of Hillel says both apply.
5:18 The House of Shammai insists that a fourth-year vineyard should not be pruned, but the House of Hillel disagrees, stating it should be pruned.
5:19 The House of Shammai decrees that produce from a vineyard’s fourth year should not be redeemed when in grape form, only when it's wine. The House of Hillel, however, allows for redemption either as wine or grapes. Despite their differences, both Houses agree that the produce from a vineyard’s fourth year should not be redeemed while still attached to the ground.
5:20 The House of Shammai forbids planting a tree or vine during the fourth year of the sabbatical cycle since the fourth year of its growth will coincide with the seventh year. The House of Hillel, however, permits planting trees or vines during the fourth year of the sabbatical cycle.
5:21 If a tree is planted the day before the New Year’s day of the seventh year, it is not subject to the law of removal until the seventh year which follows.
5:22 If someone dedicates produce already in the status of second tithe to the Temple, he redeems it, or sells it, in order to give the Temple its due share and to set aside the value of the produce originally consecrated as second tithe.
5:23 R. Yosé states, "I removed all holy produce from my house" and elaborates that this refers to the dough offering.
5:24 Another interpretation suggests that once you have removed it from the house, you are no longer responsible for it. The mouths of all those who fulfill the commandments are open in prayer to the Omnipresent and their prayers are answered, which is evidenced by the scriptural verse, “You shall pray to him and he will hear you, when you decide on a matter, it will be established for you.” 
5:25 Scripture also states, “And Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall and prayed,” and, "Look down from your holy dwelling place.” This refers to the place of looking down mentioned in the passage, "Truth will spring up from the ground and righteousness will look down from the heavens." This means that blessings come from the heavenly storehouse of good, as stated in Scripture, "May the Lord open for you his storehouse of good, the heavens."
5:26 The verse, "And bless your people," can be seen as inclusive of every blessing, as shown in the verse, "Blessed are you in the city."
5:27 The verse "Israel" suggests that all these blessings come through the merit of Israel, as shown in Scripture, "Israel dwelt in safety.” The verse "And the earth" implies that all these blessings come through the merit of the altar, as referenced in Scripture, "Make me an altar of earth."
5:28 The phrase "Which you gave us" suggests that all these blessings come in proportion to the agricultural offerings given to God, as mentioned in the scripture, "Houses full of all good things."
5:29 The phrase "As you vowed" refers to the promise made to Abraham, as mentioned in Scripture, "By myself I have sworn, says the Lord, because of what you have done I will surely bless you." Moreover, all these blessings come through the merit of the tribes, indicated in Scripture, within the verse, "the oaths of the tribes." The word "land" represents the land itself, and the phrase "Flowing with milk and honey" symbolizes the abundance of the crop due to the giving of tithes. 
5:30 R. Simeon b. Eleazar adds that failure to keep the produce clean and failure to separate tithes removes flavor and abundance from the produce.