LeNevukhei HaTekufah
לנבוכי התקופה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

LeNevukhei HaTekufah

Foreword







Gate 1



Gate 2



Gate 3



Chapter 1














So, what in fact are the essential differences between Judaism's and Hellenism's world outlooks? Behold, those who look upon everything from a superficial perspective have a short answer to this question. They say that the distinction is between ethics and aesthetics. The first, ethics, they ascribe to the Jews; whereas the second, aesthetics, they ascribe to the Greeks.
Yet this is a very superficial distinction indeed. It is impossible to suspect Hellenism of not knowing from ethics, just like it is impossible to suspect Judaism of not knowing from aesthetics. The Greek philosophers also wrote books about character traits which were even translated into Hebrew, and it is possible for us to learn several lofty and sublime ethical ideas from them. Likewise, from the other side — aesthetics has a place in the written Torah, as well as in the Oral Tradition. However, it is possible for us to refine the above distinction and rephrase it as follows: Hellenism comes to ethics from aesthetics, whereas with Judaism it is just the opposite; it comes to aesthetics from ethics.
There is an example of this is in the Mishnah (Shabbat 6:4): A man may neither go out on Shabbat with a sword nor with a bow. Rabbi Eliezer says, "These weapons are ornaments for him." And the sages say, "They are nothing other than a disgrace for him, as it is written: <i>And they shall beat their swords into plowshares</i> (Isaiah 2:4)." So what do we learn from the sages, the law following them? In fact, the crux of the disagreement between R. Eliezer and the sages here is not about the laws of ethics but about the laws of <b>beauty</b>. The law says that a man may go out with anything that is an ornament on Shabbat, and we must only decide what belongs in the category of ornaments. Rabbi Eliezer, from his perspective, says correctly that since a sword and a bow are considered ornaments by people, it is permissible to go out with them on Shabbat. However, as mentioned, the law is not like him but like the sages, on account of an ethical reason from the future of a prophecy about the end of days that promises: <i>And they shall beat their swords into plowshares</i>. As from Judaism's point of view, there is no beauty at all in something that is unethical, such that we do not only see what is good or evil from the ethical but also what is beautiful or disgusting. So, for us, that which is good in an ethical sense is also considered to be beautiful, and visa-versa.