Toldot Yaakov Yosef
תולדות יעקב יוסף
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Toldot_Yaakov_Yosef
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Toldot Yaakov Yosef

Title



Introduction



Bereshit

1 The discerning person will contemplate, and the understanding person will know.  To interpret the section: "In the beginning, God created the heavens and the earth, and the earth was unformed and void, etc."  And God said, "Let there be light, and there was light, etc." (Genesis 1:1-5).
2 It seems to me that it says in the Talmud (Rosh Hashanah 10b), "On Rosh Hashanah, Yosef emerged from prison, etc." As it is said (Psalms 81:6): "He made it a testimony in Joseph when he went forth over the land of Egypt, etc."
3 It seems to me that this can be explained.  As I wrote later regarding what is stated in the Tikkunei Zohar (Tikkun 26, 70b), 'I, the Lord, have not changed' (Malachi 3:6).  But regarding sinners, the Holy One, blessed be He, appears as though He has changed and He is concealed within many garments and within many coverings, and within many shells, which are the concepts of chaos, void and darkness, etc.  And this is what is meant by 'I will surely hide My face from them' (Deuteronomy 32:20).  But those who cling to Me and to My presence will never experience change, etc.  See there (in the Zohar).  Thus, we see that there are many garments and coverings in which the Holy One, blessed be He, hides Himself.
4  However, I wrote later that I heard from my teacher, may his memory be a blessing, that if a person knows that the Holy One, blessed be He, is concealed there, this is not concealment.  Because then all evildoers are scattered.  And this is what is meant by 'I will surely hide My face from them' (Deuteronomy 31:17-18).  Meaning, that He will conceal from them the knowledge that the Holy One, blessed be He, is there in this concealment.  And the words of the wise are filled with grace.
5 And similarly, I heard from him that the initials of the phrase 'אמר אויב ארדוף' (Exodus 15:9), etc. are the five initials where the chief of the universe is concealed, in the secret of the name Sa’el.  And the words of the wise are filled with grace.
6  And after a person knows this principle, which is a great principle, that there is no barrier separating him from his God, in times of Torah and prayer, if strange thoughts come upon him, these too are garments and coverings within which the Holy One, blessed be He, is concealed.  Regardless, after a person knows that the Holy One, blessed be He, is concealed there, this is no longer concealment.
7 And behold, the word השנה has the same gematria as שטן, except that there is an extra aleph (א).  For the aleph is the Chief of the Universe who is also concealed there, as was stated above.
8  And with this, it will be understood that on Rosh Hashanah, Yosef was released from prison.  That is to say, after Yosef understood on Rosh Hashanah that the word הש"נה has the same gematria as שט"ן , with one extra aleph, which is the Chief of the Universe, and that is Rosh Hashanah, who is concealed even within the shells, which are associated with Satan, as in the secret of 'and His kingdom rules over all' (Psalms 103:19), to subdue the klipot, and thus it is Rosh Hashana, and when he knew this all evil was dispersed, for the klipot were a prison for the Shechinah, so, too, in the physical sense, Yosef left the prison when he shattered the klipot through this very awareness.  And this is what is meant by 'He made it a testimony in Joseph' (Psalms 81:6), through this knowledge, the letter heh was added to him, so that he would be called Yehosef; this is the secret of daat (knowledge), which is associated with the divine name Y-H-V, as is known, and this is his name as he went forth over the land of Egypt; understand this well.

Noach











And this is what it says: "Noah walked with God"—that at the very least, on Shabbat, which is called "Noah" [a time of rest], one should attach one’s thought to God, whether in thought, or in speech, or in action—at least each person according to their level: for a common person, in action; for a Torah scholar, in speech; and for a righteous and pious person, also in thought. As I have heard [from my master, the Baal Shem Tov], distraction of the mind [from holiness] is forbidden on Shabbat, from an a fortiori argument regarding tefillin, etc., And the words of a wise person's mouth are gracious.
And this is what it says, "And Noah begot"—that the restfulness and settledness of Shabbat involves three levels: one, to acquire [an expression of the three levels of the soul:] nefesh-ruach-neshama on Shabbat. And one must prepare for this during the six weekdays—three [days] after Shabbat and three [days] before it. This is called "Shem" (a name), similar to "and David made a name for himself."

Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei























<b>He dreamed</b> and behold a ladder was set up on the earth and the head of it reached toward heaven: This means to say, through it being set up on the earth - the lowest level - through this, will his head ascend and reach the heavens to the highest level. "One who is small, he is the great one" (Zohar 3:168b).

Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera
















And it appears to me that the explanation of this can only come through explaining the verses 2 through 6 of the 6th chapter of Vayikra: it is difficult, behold, why do I have written "is kept going on it" (Leviticus 6:2) which does not seem to apply to Aharon, and yet the verse opened with "command Aharon".
And it appears to me as it is present in Eruvin 63a what they explained, that the children of Aharon the priest will light the fire on the altar (Leviticus 1:7) even though the fire comes down from heaven, it is a mitzvah to bring common fire, etc. And the Rema (Moshe Isserles) explained in his book (Torat HaOlah III, chapter 2) that a person needs to become aroused to kindle with a common fire, and then the kindling of Y"ah comes from heaven, etc, see there. And the words of the Tosfot, in Eruvin (Mai) teach that they offered incense on the outside altar, because if it was on the inside, fire from heaven would not have descended, etc, however in the Torat Kohanim it is taught that they offered in the inside altar, and there they were burned, and this needs to be studied more deeply, until here.
And to understand all this, it appears to me that at first one needs to look at the first chapter of Brachot (Brachot 5b): "A baraita: 'Aba Binyiamin says: on two things I was careful/I worried every day of my life, that my prayer should be before my bed, and that my bed should be between north and south'. What does 'before my bed mean? Let us say in front of my bed - in this case one needs that the bed should not separate etc." And the question asked by the Ta"z (maybe at Orach Chayim 90:5) What is "I worried? That he had set his bed between north and south. And what I explained, see in a different place. Also, what is the issue of joining these two things?







And with all this one can understand the command: 'command Aharon and his sons etc, the fire of the altar perpetually on (Leviticus 6:2-6) It means that in Aharon, there is where the fire is to be perpetual, since the altar is a symbol of compassion and the flames of Ya"h, of the Shechinah, which is called altar, as it is known, is to be perpetually on, inside the kohen, [meaning] one who will serve the Holy Blessed Name as a kohen, that is, one who will arouse those two entryways, which are north and south.
And this is specifically a person who will prepare oneself, so that to be [the verse] will be suitable: "the lips of the kohen will guard awareness" (Malachi 2:7) and as I explained regarding the verse "that the faithful have vanished, that the loyal are no more" (Ps. 12:2) which can be read forwards and backwards.
And through this one understands that even though the fire comes down from heaven, meaning, from "those who seek the welfare of the faithful in Israel" (II Samuel 20:19), which are called heavens, as I wrote regarding "listen heavens etc" (Deuteronomy 32:1). In any instance, it is a mitzvah to bring common fire, which are the multitude of the people, that they too arouse themselves and connect with the one who seek the welfare of the faithful in Israel. When they connect only in their own groups, and when they poke fun at each other, evil follows, God forbid.
And through this one can understand "a perpetual fire shall be kept burning on the altar" (Leviticus 6:6). At the beginning is was warning for the kohanim that they are the seekers of the welfare of the faithful in Israel, and now, there is a warning for the common folk that they are actually the 'common', which bring a regular fire, so that they will cause "a perpetual fire to be kept burning", which are the seekers of welfare of the faithful in Israel. And this that is written "it shall not go out" (Leviticus 6:5) is that they should cause the burning out of the flames of the service to God that the seekers of the welfare for the faithful in Israel, as it is written "that the faithful have vanished, that the loyal are no more" (Ps. 12:2). And this is easy to understand.

Bo
































































































































































<b>And the Talmud and the Legal Codes hinted to this:</b> "The eve of the fourteenth, we check for chametz with the light of a candle" (Pesachim 1:1). For a person is called a lamp (<i>ner</i>), as it is written (Proverbs 20:27), “The spirit of man is the lamp of the Lord.” And that is, as a man has two hundred and forty-eight limbs, together with the spirit and the life - that is <i>ner</i> (the numerical count of which is two hundred and fifty), as it is written in the Zohar, etc. And the Torah is called light, such that the Torah scholar who has the Torah in his hands can enlighten you from the darkness of night, so that you can check for chametz – which is the evil impulse – in order to destroy it. And it is like the Rambam wrote (Mishneh Torah, Human Dispositions 2:1), “Just like there is sickness with the body, etc. and the physician for the spirit is the Torah scholar.”















































(208) And we will begin by explaining the verses of the portion "Send to you men" (Numbers 13:2-18) ... and they will spy the land I am giving you ... and he said 'go up the Negev and up the mountain and see' ... and the doubts increased. And also why does it say 'go up the hill'?
(209) And it appears to me, as Rabeinu Tam  wrote in his book Sefer HaYashar, that "a person needs to check inside themselves in what level they are, so as to know how to turn oneself etc if one's heart tends to oppression and stealing and so on, one then knows that one tends to the left, and then they should make a strong effort to tend to the right. And if one's heart tends to tzedakah and loving acts, one knows that they have received grace in the eyes of Hashem (Sefer HaYashar 9). See there.
(210) Yet, when a person checks inside to know themselves, this already shows a good level, since an evil person sees themselves fit as a fiddle, and they have no doubt whatsoever, thinking that they are in the level of a righteous person, and should even the entire world tell them the opposite, an evil person does not believe [those words] at all.
(211) And for a person to reach this level at all, of checking themselves, there is one advice. A person is a mixture of good and evil, the body tends to what is physical and to bodily pleasures, and the soul tends to spiritual things, and in order to subdue the physical so the physical will too tend to spiritual things, and so that the physical becomes a shape, a person needs to break their desires of all those physical pleasures, and choose the way of Torah, that is " you shall eat bread with salt, and rationed water shall you drink; you shall sleep on the ground, your life will be one of privation, and in Torah shall you labor. If you do this, “Happy shall you be and it shall be good for you” (Psalms 128:2): “Happy shall you be” in this world, “and it shall be good for you” in the world to come" (Pirkei Avot 6:4). And the commentators already wondered regarding what is happiness in this world? And it seems to me that there is no privation greater than the great and permanent war against the evil inclination, which never stops day or night, as the great sage said "you came from a small war, prepare yourselves for a great war etc" (Duties of the Heart, Fifth Treatise on Devotion 5:6). And behold, the yetzer hara does not arouse itself only in regards to food and drink and physical pleasures, as it says "and Jeshurun got fat and kicked" (Deuteronomy 32:15); and "and you ate, you were satisfied and your heart grew haughty" (Deuteronomy 8:14); however, when a person conducts themselves in the ways of the Torah, the yetzer hara has no entrance to seduce that person, and therefore the person has rest from the great war, and from the sensation of privation of the yetzer hara, and so it is good for that person also in this world, as one is quiet and rests from the great war.
(212) And so we can understand that this portion is about that immediate moment and also about the times of all generations. This is due to the fact that a human is called "a small world", and inside a person there is a Moshe, and there are also spies, since awareness is called Moshe, and this is the yetzer hatov, since evil people have no awareness, and they are called fools, since they have no awareness, as known. And the good inclination does not control them, only the evil inclination does, yet regarding the righteous the good inclination controls them (Brachot 61b) and gives them advice not to trust themselves, and [the good inclination] sends spies to check the body, that is called "Cnaan, a trader who uses false balances and loves to overreach" (Hosea 12:8). And this is the meaning of "send to your own awareness men, and they will spy the land of Cnaan, etc" - to check oneself to where one's heart tends, if towards physicality or spirituality.
(213) Yet to come to this level is impossible when one is in the clutches of the inclination to evil, which can seize a decent person, and therefore Moshe advised to "go up to the Negev", meaning, given that a person is a mix of good and evil sometimes rising above and sometimes going under as it is well known, therefore he said "go up to the Negev"because the Negev is an expression for dryness, that is, the houses of the evil people are filled with all that is good, which is not the case with the tzadikim who are hungry and thirsty and dry, and walks in the paths of Torah, bread with salt and water by measure, and so the evil inclination has no entry.
(214) And what he said "go up to the Negev" he meant when one begins to go up this way, which is called Negev. And also its meaning is that it is the right, and then "you will go up the hill", meaning, to conquer the hill, which is the evil inclination that looks like a hill in a great battle. And once you left the dominion of the evil inclination, then "you will see the land", which does not happen before this, there was no sense of seeing the right path, since one seized by the evil inclination is called "blind", as it is known.
(215) And he said "and you will see etc if it is strong or weak" (Numbers 13:17-18) - and this is also the aspect that a person is able to check themselves in whatever level they are, as I wrote before regarding the verse in Song of Songs (Songs 8:1-2) " if only it could be as with a brother,as if you had nursed at my mother’s breast: then I could kiss you when I met you etc" and also regarding the verse in Genesis "they were naked and were not ashamed of themselves" (Genesis 2:25), that a person when checking oneself they know whether they are strong and connected in the service of Hashem, and when it never occurs to the person a laughing thought and a bad and dispersive thought, it is because they were able to divest from the physical, which are the husks and the illusions, and they cling to God and are called "naked" and then they are not ashamed. That is not the case when one thinks of a laughing thought, or the other impediments [to prayer] then one knows that "they are lazy, lazy in the work" (Exodus 5:17) of Hashem. And this is what it means "are they strong or weak": one should know from those signs whether one is strong or weak in the service of Hashem.
(216) And he said: "many or few" - and this can also be explained through the aspect of knowing oneself, even if one is humble - this  is "a fat tail with thorn" (Rosh Hashanah 17a) because there are two aspects of humility as explained in the first chapter of Rosh Hashanah: "'for the remnant of His inheritance,' (Micah 7:18) but not for all His inheritance, for one who regards oneself as a remainder" (Rosh Hashanah 17b). And the explanation of the Rif is that 'one who is lenient [with others] and thinks of oneself as nothing, to that person others are lenient. But regarding one who says that according to their thoughts it is not appropriate to answer, to that one others are not lenient, see there. And this is why the text says "are they small?", meaning, one who is small due to one's humility, one who is lenient and does not answer back to their denigrator, in any instance such a person should check themselves to see IF they actually think of themselves as great, similar to 'IF you lend money' (Exodus 22:24, and see Rashi there), which is an expression of THAT - in this case one's smallness comes from the fact that one actually sees oneself as great, and thinks that one should not answer [to the detractor] and this is not a good characteristic, rather, one should really think of oneself as nothing.
(217) "And what the land that they inhabit is like, is it good or bad" - as its simple meaning, if one's heart desires mitzvot and good deeds, or 'bad', that it desires bad characteristics, and through this one will know how to subdue oneself towards the characteristic that is its opposite, until one comes to the appropriate characteristic, as the Rambam explains in the Eight Chapters of Pirkei Avot (Eight Chapters 3-4), see there.
(218) "And how are the cities, are they open or fortified" (Number 17:19) - A complete person needs to test oneself regarding their nature, if they cling to God always, whether at home or outside, and if they are not hurt by their relationship with others, then they do not need solitude, they can just go about mixed with other human beings, maybe one will see something that needs a fixing, and one can also bring close others to the service of Hashem just as Avraham did. This is what I wrote regarding the verse "if in Sodom, among the city, are found fifty righteous" (Genesis 18:26), see there. And if one sees oneself that as soon as one leaves the door of the house of study, immediately "at the door sin crouches" (Genesis 4:7) then one should choose solitude. And this is "encampments", and the explanation of Rashi: "[Moses] gave over a sign to [the spies]: if they dwell scattered, they are strong since they rely on their strength. etc." Meaning, if one knows that one still clings [to Hashem] while scattered [among people], there is no need for solitude, one "lives in encampments". And if not, "in fortified cities" meaning, one should choose solitude. 
(219) "And what the land is like, fat or lean" (Numbers 13:20) - this is that a person should test and know in their heart of hearts regarding what they learn why did they come to this world, and in how they can progress, if in Oral Torah, which is Mishnah, which is the root of all the Oral Torah, or in the hidden aspects of Torah, and one should see what their soul desires, and through this one will know why they came to this world. And this is "what is the land, is it fat" - the letters HaSHMeNaH are the same of MiSHNaH, or "is it lean" RaZaH, since RaZ is secret, which is the internal aspects of the Torah.
(220) "Does it have trees or not" (Numbers 13:20), as it is written in the Zohar "do not destroy its trees [etza] (Deut. 20:19) this is the student of the sages that advises [meyaetz] the people regarding teshuvah etc" (Zohar 3:202a and Zohar 3:202b). If so, in this case also, regarding an individual, the inclination to good is called tree, since it advises a person to Torah and teshuvah. And a person should test if the inclination to good rules them and advises them well, and if not, one should "exert yourselves and take", meaning that to do the opposite needs strength, and doing the opposite [of the yetzer hara] is "fruit of the land" since evil deeds are the husks and externals of the fruit, which does not happen regarding good deeds, which are the fruit themselves, and this is why is written "and exert yourselves and bring some of the fruit of the land".
(221) "now these days were the days of the first ripe-grapes" (Numbers 13:20) meaning, that all this a person needs to hurry, and do this in the days of first-fruits, that is, when one is young, which is before the old days, as the Zohar explains regarding "In the face of the gray-hair, you are to rise" (Leviticus 19:32), [meaning, rise yourself spiritually when you are young] and so it will be good when one comes [to the next world] (Zohar 3:87b:6), and do not overthink this.

Beshalach











And let us first explain "is there Ad-nai among us, or isn't? And Amalek came." (Exodus 17:7-8) And the famous question is what is the connection between the issues. And it seems to me that it is known what the rabbis said (Sotah 31a) "in all their troubles He is troubled" (Isaiah 63:9) is written and the reading is with an alef [making in all their troubles He was not troubled." And a sage and smart person will pay attention and understand that suffering for a human being is a suffering for the Shechinah, as it is written (Sanhedrin 6:5) "My head hurts, My arm hurts", and so the person will pray over the distress of the Shechinah, and immediately the distress of the human will pass,  and this is what [I say] if a person understands that in all their sufferings God suffers, then there is no suffering. This is what the verse says "Isn't it because Ad-nai is not in me that all these evils befell me?" (Deut. 31:17)- if I had paid attention that this is suffering for the Shechinah then Ad-nai would be in me, and then those evils would not have befallen me. And this is easy to understand. And through this we can understand "because they tested, is there Ad-nai among us or isn't?" and then "Amalek came", since once my God is not in me, this event happened to me. And this is easy to understand.


Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Vayikra



--- The explanation of that which my teacher asked about that which the Sages, may their memory be blessed, said (Avot 6:2), "Each and every day a heavenly echo goes out from Mount Horeb, and announces, etc.": Either way, it is difficult. If it is impossible for anyone to hear this announcement – if so, why does the echo go out at all? And if it is possible to hear, what is the reason that it is not heard? For if a person were to say that he heard it, he would be condemned as a false prophet! And he explained that 'there is no speech and no words' above; it is only in the realm of thought. If so, the thoughts of repentance that come to a man are from the announcement, etc. And (with relation to this teaching,) the words of the mouth of a sage are a charm. Behold, if one inclines his ear to listen to the call and the announcement, it is possible for anybody to hear it – meaning in his thoughts. Indeed, if one is intelligent enough to understand that this thought is the voice of the announcement and the heavenly echo from God Himself, may He be blessed, by way of His extending Himself throughout the worlds, until it reaches the thought of this man; and he inclines his ear to hear properly 'to listen and to observe' – then God will continue to speak to him, about how he is to behave in the ways of God. As it is written (Psalms 25:8), "Good and upright is the Lord; therefore He shows sinners the way."

Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim







































































































<b>And this</b> is the elegance of Hillel’s phrasing, “If I am not for myself, who is for me, etc.” For this is not the phrasing of a question, like the simple understanding of the world. Rather, it is a statement: If I am not for myself, meaning if the prayer, which is called I, as is well-known, is not for me, meaning for my own benefit, but rather as if it is the divine presence that is pleading and praying from the Holy One, blessed be He – that is [for] the unification of the Holy One, blessed be He, and the divine presence – then Who [<i>Mi</i>] is for me. For there is a trait that is called Who, which is Understanding [<i>Binah</i>], which is called the living God, and that is the life of the King, from which there is life. And since he has connected Kingship [<i>Malkhut</i>, which is the diving presence], to the Holy One, blessed be He, which is life, then minds from Understanding, which is called life, are drawn to him, so life is automatically drawn to me, as it is impossible for it to be otherwise. [This is the case] even though he did not intend it for himself

Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Nasso























































And according to this, it seems to me that the verses of the priestly blessing (Numbers 6:23-26) can be explained: <i>Speak to Aaron and to his sons, saying, “Thus shall you bless the children of Israel, saying to them: May the Lord bless you and protect you. May the Lord shine His countenance upon you and give you grace. May the Lord lift His countenance upon you and give you peace.”</i> As in the Talmud (Sotah 38a:13), they expounded, “’Saying to them,’ face to face, etc.” As behold it is known that by way of arousal below, it causes arousal above. This is like Rabbi Moshe Alshikh wrote [about], <i>you shall love your neighbor as yourself, I am the Lord</i> (Leviticus 19:18): Through there being love among the lower ones, it causes love among the Upper ones. And through turning the face towards the face, it causes bounty and blessing via the direct light, [which is] the opposite of the refracted light, which is strict justice. And I have written about this later.















































And here the mitzvah of lightning the Menorah (Numbers 8:2) will be explained, that truly it is [done] in every human being and in every time through the kohen. We already mentioned that a person is called candle/light: the 248 members and inside them soul (Nefesh) and spirit (Ruach), behold, these are candle (NeR). Even though a person has also a Neshamah (essence) in any instance, through a sin, the Neshamah separates from the person, and only soul and spirit are left. And the Alshich has written that the kohen is hinted at by the text, "the lips of the kohen guard knowledge and they seek Torah from his mouth" (Malachi 2:7) "he held many back from iniquity" (Malachi 2:6); and so too is mentioned in the Zohar "whoever seizes the hand of an evildoer and enables him to leave the evil path, rises three levels, which does not happen to other human beings, etc (Zohar 2:128b:3); and it seems to me to recall what I heard as way of musar [on the verse] "seeks the good of his people" (Esther 10:3) - the one who speaks of ethics and admonishes at the gate how should a person cling to the Holy One of Blessing, and after that all those who listen will be connected in unity, so that the speaker would make the words of the Holy One cling to them, and this is "to seize the hand of the evildoer" to raise them. And these are wise words.
























.....
























































































219 And here the mitzvah of lightning the Menorah (Numbers 8:2) will be explained, that truly it is [done] in every human being and in every time through the kohen. We already mentioned that a person is called candle/light: the 248 members and inside them soul (Nefesh) and spirit (Ruach), behold, these are candle (NeR). Even though a person has also a Neshamah (essence) in any instance, through a sin, the Neshamah separates from the person, and only soul and spirit are left. And the Alshich has written that the kohen is hinted at by the text, "the lips of the kohen guard knowledge and they seek Torah from his mouth" (Malachi 2:7) "he held many back from iniquity" (Malachi 2:6); and so too is mentioned in the Zohar "whoever seizes the hand of an evildoer and enables him to leave the evil path, rises three levels, which does not happen to other human beings, etc (Zohar 2:128b:3); and it seems to me to recall what I heard as way of musar [on the verse] "seeks the good of his people" (Esther 10:3) - the one who speaks of ethics and admonishes at the gate how should a person cling to the Holy One of Blessing, and after that all those who listen will be connected in unity, so that the speaker would make the words of the Holy One cling to them, and this is "to seize the hand of the evildoer" to raise them. And these are wise words.



222 And it said: "in front/on the face of the Menorah, the seven lights will illuminate" (Numbers 8:2). Meaning - the the leader of the generation that intends to raise the people is called "the face of the Menorah", just as they are "the face of the generation." And when a person looks at the illuminated face of their friend, through their unity and their integration with one another, the leader of the generation with the generation of their people, and the people of the generation with the leader of the generation, then through the clinging of one to another they raise, as it is written in the verse "and there Israel encamped" and then "Moshe went up to E-lohim" see there in my writings. And this, that is written here, under a condition "in front/on the face of the Menorah, the seven lights will illuminate" - "because the world is built through lovingkindness [chesed]" (Ps. 89:3), and this is called the seven days of building , and through that we know there are seven levels in Israel, and through their integration in front of the Menorah [which also teaches this to be in front of the Upper Menorah, as known] the lights will illuminate, to continue the essence also through soul and spirit, and the Tabernacle of the essence is also in the head of a person, that has seven shafts of the menorah, which are the secret of the seven gates mentioned in the Sefer HaYetzirah (Sefer Yetzirah 4:4).
223 This can be explained in three ways, and they follow each other. Meaning, one needs to explain "in front/on the face of the Menorah" (Numbers 8:2) regarding the parts of the human being: the tabernacle/dwelling of the soul and the spirit are the liver and the heart, and the tabernacle of the essence is the brain. And when a person fixes their actions, then the essence continues to reign in the brain, that returns and illuminates the seven shafts of the Menorah, that in the head the essence belongs, and from there it extends the light to the soul and the spirit in the 248 members. And all this is in the personal level.
224 And another explanation, in the way that encompasses the world. The tzadik and the leader of the generation is called "the face of the menorah", and the people of the generation are called "the lights of the menorah" because every one made of 248 members of the body, and the soul and spirit, behold, candle (NeR). And the leader is the essence of all that is encompassed by the generation, and enlivens them through his unity, as I merited a few times.
225 And the third explanation, is one that encompasses all of the worlds, above and below, that through the lower ones doing what is appropriate they add light to the worlds above, in the secret of "give strength  to E-lohim" (Psalms 68:35), which is the face of the Upper Menorah that receives the light from above, and then makes that light flow to the person called candle (NeR, Nefesh Ruach) as it is written "the candle of Ad-nai is the soul of a person" (Prov, 20:27)

Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak


















And through this, <i>Balak [...] saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites</i> is understood. [The Amorite] is the material [<i>chomer</i>], as they only used it for the needs of the Elevated [to consecrate it] and forbade the remainder. And this is a great fence, to be saved from the sin that flows from the material. And Balak is the [same] numerical count as Samael when [the word, Samael is counted as one extra number], for the evil impulse was clothed by Balak. And when he saw what Israel had done to the material [<i>chomer</i>], being the numeral count of the Amorites adding three, then <i>Moab was very alarmed in the face of the people because it was large [rav, which also means great]</i>. This means to say that the evil impulse was deliberating if it should come in the guise of Moab, meaning as the messenger from the Father [<i>meAv</i>] in heaven, with the appearance of the evil impulse, to seduce [them] to sin. But the one from the Father was alarmed, since they would certainly not heed it, even those defined as the people, the masses. [These] material people would also not heed it, <i>because [they] were great</i>. Great describing them in quantity, quality, and perfection, once they made that fence towards the material mentioned above, which is the root of everything. All the more so, [those described by] the aspect of Israel, Torah scholars and righteous people, would not heed him. And that is [the meaning of] that which is written, and the aspect of <i>Moab was disgusted in the face of the Children of Israel</i>. Those were the people of stature, all the more so would they not heed it. That is why <i>Moab was disgusted in the face of the Children of Israel</i>, as they would not come to them at all.

Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



Ha'Azinu



V'Zot HaBerachah



I heard this from my master

