Kli Yakar on Leviticus
כלי יקר על ויקרא
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Kli_Yakar_on_Leviticus
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org

Kli Yakar on Leviticus



Chapter 1



Verse 1



Verse 2

“Should any person from you bring forward to the Lord an offering” - It begins in singular and finishes in plural “you shall bring forward your offering.”  Rashi’s interpretation that two people may donate an elevation offering in partnership does not satisfactorily address this verse and its neighbor, nor the beginning and the end, for we don’t know the limits of this idea [of partnership]. And it seems to me that the text wanted to warn all those bringing an offering to God not to stumble in the two ways that Cain and Abel stumbled, who were the first people to offer an offering.  For Cain stumbled in that he brought from the lesser and tawdry crops though he planted grain.  Those who err mortally needed to bring the life of an animal in exchange for their life.  And for [cases of] distress, the Holy One Blessed be He allowed for a poor person to bring a grain offering lacking life and offer it as if that person was offering an animal, as Rashi explains on the verse, “Should a person bring forward a grain offering” (Leviticus 2:1). Abel, even though he brought an offering from the choicest of his sheep, nevertheless, he did not do well either for the offering did not emerge from himself and he did not move quickly to do this commandment on his own accord.  Only after he saw Cain offer an offering did he become jealous of him and Abel from an offering as well to match him.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15



Verse 16

<b>Then you shall bring an offering of new grain to the Lord:</b> It is a sign for the day of the giving of the Torah, since the Torah must be new to a person on every day, as if he received it on Mount Sinai [that day]. And that which it is not mentioned explicitly in the Torah that this day is [the day of] the giving of the Torah, and so [too] it is not mentioned explicitly in the Torah that Rosh Hashanah is the day of judgement, the reason for both of them is [the same], as I have written in my essay, Ollalot Ephraim: That about the giving of the Torah, God did not want to limit [it] to one specific day, since it must be similar to a person as if each and every day of the year, he received it on that day from Mount Sinai. As in truth our rabbis, may their memory be blessed, said (Eruvin 54b) that the Torah is compared to a breast: that all the time that the infant presses on it, it brings out a new flavor; so [too] the Torah - any one who ponders it brings out a new explanation every day. Therefore it is correct that it be similar to him as if he received it today at Mount Sinai. And, if so, every day is the [day] of the giving of the Torah for those that ponder it. Therefore, it is not fitting to limit its giving to one specific day. And therefore, our rabbis, may their memory be blessed, said (Sifrei, Veetchanan 6:6) that words of Torah should be new to you, and not like an old thing that the heart of a person is sick of. And, in truth, you find a novelty in it on each and every day. And therefore the day of its giving is [nowhere] elucidated in the Torah more than that which is hinted in the bringing of the new offering - to teach that the Torah is a new offering on each and every day.

Verse 17



Verse 18



Verse 19



Verse 20



Verse 21



Verse 22



Verse 23



Verse 24



Verse 25



Verse 26



Verse 27



Verse 28



Verse 29



Verse 30



Verse 31



Verse 32



Verse 33



Verse 34



Verse 35



Verse 36



Verse 37



Verse 38



Verse 39



Verse 40



Verse 41



Verse 42



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Verse 1

God said to Moses on Mt. Sinai: What is the connection between Shemittah and Mt. Sinai? etc.
	The meaning is that when Moses went up Mount Sinai after seven weeks, that Israel counted 49 days from Pesach to Shavuot, then that mountain was sanctified, and forbidden from ploughing and sowing on the 50th day, on which the Torah was given. And this is the length of time of the Jubilee, to call for liberty and freedom to all of Israel, freedom on the tablets, by means of the voice of the shofar of the giving of the Torah.
	At that moment God told Moses the matter of Shemittah and the Jubilee, saying that through the number 7 and the number 49 I am giving this holiness to all the land of Israel. For this has a similarity and connection with Mt. Sinai from the side of there being an air that makes people wise (B. Baba Batra 158b). And the Torah [in general] is not like the Torah of the land of Israel and Mt. Sinai. Therefore it was appropriate to give also to that land the holiness of Mount Sinai after the number 49 years, and thus with the number 7.
	Or in order to make a memorial of the standing at Sinai through the calling of liberty and the blowing of the shofar. This joins to all the other reasons that there is to this mitzvah.
	Therefore it was said on Mount Sinai, and this is the correct meaning.