Reshimot Shiurim on Sanhedrin
רשימות שיעורים על סנהדרין
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Reshimot_Shiurim_on_Sanhedrin
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Reshimot Shiurim on Sanhedrin

Introduction



Foreword







Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

Rashi on "Thefts and injuries"- "One who denies having a guarded object that he used [without permission] is a thief. And so too, one who grabs something from his friend is a thief and stealing the spear from the Egyptian but one who lent [money] and didn't pay it back isn't called a thief because a loan is given to be spent."
Being precise in Rashi's words, he wrote "Denying a guarded object that he used [without permission]." and we established in Bava Kamma that one who denies a guarded object is made a thief and responsible for all damages even if he didn't use the object. Therefore, there is a question of why Rashi included the phrase "that he used"? To answer we can explain that Rashi holds that what we said in Bava Kamma that "one who denies a guarded object is made a thief and responsible for all damages" is saying that when one denies a guarded object, the obligations of theft are applied to the watchman and therefore he is responsible for all damages. However, there is no application of the status of an acquired stolen object to the object unless he uses it. A practical application of this distinction would be if the watchman can acquire the object through changing it or the owner giving up hope on it. Since the object is not acquired as a stolen item if he only denied it but didn't use it, then he can't acquire it through change or giving up because it is still considered a guarded object. However, the man himself still acquires the status of "thief" since he violated the sin of theft, and he has the obligations of a thief, so he is responsible for the object as a thief.
And we can bring a proof that there is a difference between simply denying an object to also using it from the Rambam who writes "...but if he used it and claims it was stolen and swears and then witnesses come [and say he still has it], he is exempt from the double payment [that one who denies having a guarded object pays] since he used the object and became liable for and acquired it. And so too, if one claimed it was lost and swears and then claims it was stolen and swears and then witnesses come [and say he still has it], he is exempt from the double payment because it already left the owner's possession from the first oath." Being precise in the language, we see that he says that one who uses an object is exempt became he "became responsible for and acquired it", while by one who claimed it was lost, he brings a different reason that he is exempt: "that it left the owners possession with the first oath" (meaning that he didn't have to swear that it was stolen since he already swore that it was lost, and only when you have to swear that it was stolen are you obligated in the double payment.) And seemingly the Rambam needs to be explained why there is a difference between the two cases as both one who claims the object was lost and one who uses the object are considered thieves. And the Raavad also notes this and says "this thing is not halachic, as Rav Yochanan argues on it explicitly as he says that one who claims it was lost and swears and then claims it was stolen and swears it exempt because it already left the owners possession with the first oath, and not because he is made a thief and acquires it. We see, that even if he is made a thief and acquires it and is responsible for all damages, since he exempts himself with the oath that it was stolen, he has to pay double..."
It seems that we can explain the Rambam as holding that there is a difference in the basis of the laws of denying and using [a guarded object], as one who uses it acquires the object through the acquisition of theft after he took the object from the owner's possession with an act of possession, which is not true regarding one who denies the object as since he doesn't do an act of acquisition, he doesn't acquire it through an acquisition of theft. This is implicit in what the Rambam wrote "one who uses the object... behold he is a thief and it responsible for all damages and the stolen object comes into his possession just like all other thieves..." meaning that there is an acquisition of theft on the object and therefore he wrote "and the stolen object comes into his possession". Whereas it is also written there "One who denies a guarded object in court is made a thief and responsible for all damages" but he doesn't write "and the stolen object comes into his possession" like he wrote regarding using the object. It is therefore proven that when one denies a guarded object without using it, only the obligations and responsibilities of a thief are applied, as the category of "thief" is applied to him, however, there is no theft acquisition of the object and the category of "stolen" is not applied as the object is still considered a "guarded object" and therefore the object does not come into his possession. According to this approach, it seems that the Rambam holds that a watchman who uses the object ends his "guarding" and is no longer responsible in a case of claiming it was stolen, as after the acquisition of theft was applied to the object, and it is considered "stolen", his guarding ends since it can't be that the categories of "stolen object" and "guarded object" are true at the same time because they are two things that contradict each other. On the other hand, regarding one who simply denies the object without using it, there is no theft acquisition, and the guarding doesn't end. And even though he category of "thief" is applied to the person, still the object is considered a guarded object and therefore the object doesn't pass into his possession. And according to this, it seems that the reason that the Rambam wrote "... and so too, if one claimed it was lost and swears and then claims it was stolen and swears and then witnesses come [and say he still has it], he is exempt from the double payment because it already left the owner's possession from the first oath." and didn't write that he is exempt because he acquired the object by claiming it was lost, was because there is not acquisition of theft when denying an object and only an application of "thief" is applied to the person that violated the sin of stealing. On the other hand, when he uses the object, there is an acquisition of theft and therefore the Rambam writes "he is exempt from the double payment, since he used the object and became liable for and acquired it". 
On the other hand, the Raavad holds that mere denial also causes the category of "stolen" to be applied to the object and the object is considered stolen and guarded at the same time. Therefore, the Raavad equates the law of denial to the law of using and holds that even though the object is considered stolen, the watchman is still obligated to pay double because it is also guarded, and he claimed it was stolen. 
According to all we have said, we can now explain why Rashi that said that [the Mishnah] was discussing a case of denial of guarded object that he used. He holds that the law of theft that is judged by 3 experts is specifically regarding a watchman that used the object because it is an acquisition of theft. This is not true for a watchman who merely denies the object for even though he is considered a thief and violated the sin of stealing, he is judged by 3 regular people like in cases of admissions and loans. Since, in that case, there is no acquisition of the object, it's status of "guarded" is not removed. Therefore, the claim is defined as a claim of a guarded object which is judged by 3 regular people. On the other hand, if he used the object, then there is an acquisition through theft on the object and it is removed from the definition of "guarded" for it is impossible for it to be stolen and guarded at the same time (according to Rashi). Therefore, the claim is considered a claim of theft which is judged by 3 experts. A possible practical application for this distinction is a case in which a paid watchman (who is responsible for theft), denied having the object and then afterwards it was stolen. We can say that the owner can make a claim against the watchman either by claiming the watchman stole it (as denial is considered theft) or make the claim against him under the laws of his responsibility as a paid watchman, because the object is still considered guarded despite his denial. And we can ask if he is judged by 3 experts like in cases of thefts and bodily damages or by 3 regular people like in cases of admissions and loans. We can answer that in this case, he is judged by 3 regular people because since no matter what he is responsible for the theft, the claim is considered a claim of a guarded object under the laws of a watchman and watchmen are judged by 3 regular people. On the other hand, if the paid watchman denied the object and then a freak accident happened to it [which he isn't responsible for], then he is only judged as a thief and would be judged with three experts like a thief. We can say that this is why Rashi specified to explain that the case [that is judged by 3 experts] is one of denial and using the object cause then the object is acquired through theft and is no longer considered "guarded" and therefore, the claim is a claim of a stolen object which is done with 3 experts. But if he merely denied then sometimes, he would be judged with 3 regular people as it depends if it is stolen afterwards- in which case he would be judged by 3 regular people as the claim is considered a claim of a guarded object or if a freak accident happens to it afterwards- where he would be judged by 3 experts as the claim is a claim of theft.

Appendix; Commentary on Hilkhot Melakhim

