Treatise on Logic
מילות הגיון
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Treatise_on_Logic
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Treatise on Logic

Introduction

Our teacher Moshe, son of the reverend Rabbi, our teacher Maimon, ztl, said:
One of the princes from among the masters of the Torah sciences and the men of elocution and poetry in the Arabic language asked a man who had studied the art of logic that he may explain to him the meanings of the terms mentioned frequently in the art of logic, and explain to him the convention of the men of that art, according to what they had agreed upon; and that he may establish in them a language concise in words and not repeat the matters many times, lest the discourse become lengthy. For his intention was not to increase his honor by learning this art because of what he had been told about it, for the introductions laid out for whomever wants to learn this art are numerous; but his intention was [to attain] knowledge of their convention in the majority of their borrowed terms, nothing else.
And now I shall commence keeping in mind what you endeavor, and I say:





Gate 1

The term which the Arab grammarian calls "the beginning", is what the master of logic calls the subject [the Hebrew term literally means "carrier"]. And what the grammarian calls "the account of the beginning" is what the master of logic calls the predicate [the Hebrew term literally means "carried"]. Whether the account is a noun, a verb, or a different word, or a phrase – all that is called the predicate. There is no difference in whether the predicate is an affirmation or a negation. For example, take: "Reuven stands". We say: "Reuven" is the subject, "stands" - the predicate. Likewise, "Reuven does not stand", we say:"Reuven" is the subject, "does not stand" – the predicate. Likewise, when we say: "Reuven stood" or "will stand", we say: "Reuven" is the subject, "stood" or "will stand" - the predicate. And if we say: "Reuven is in the house", we say "Reuven" is the subject, "in the house" – the predicate. The same [holds true] when the account comes as a phrase, be it with a noun, a verb, or whatever is joined with it – all of this we call a predicate.
The entirety of an expression composed of an account and a subject (literally: what is being recounted of) is either an affirmation or a negation. I mean to say: the subject and the predicate together are called a sentence, a phrase, and it is also called a definite statement (Aristotle's logos apophantikos). A sentence also has two parts, the subject and the predicate, and [even] if the words in the sentence are many, [it only has these two parts]. For example, take "Reuven the Hebrew who was standing in the house of Shim'on killed the son of Laban the Aramean". Here we say: The subject of this sentence is "Reuven the Hebrew who was standing in the house of Shim'on", and its predicate is "killed the son of Laban the Aramean", and infer from this.
Thus, the amount of the terms whose meaning is defined in this chapter is four: "subject", "predicate", "sentence" and "definite statement". 

Gate 2

Every sentence either affirms something about another, as if you say: "Reuven is wise" or "Shim'on is standing" or it negates one thing from another, as if you say: "Reuven is not wise" or "Shim'on did not stand". A sentence that affirms one thing about another is called an affirmative sentence, and if a thing is negated in it from another – it is called a negative sentence. Sometimes, the affirmative sentence affirms the predicate concerning all subjects, as if you say: "Every man is alive", and this is what we call a universal affirmative. "Every" is called the universal affirmative quantifier. But sometimes, the affirmative sentence affirms the predicate concerning part of the subject, as if you say: "Some men write". This is called the particular affirmative. "Some" is called the particular affirmative quantifier. And sometimes, a negative sentence negates the predicate from all the subjects, as if you say "No animal is made of stone". This is called the universal negative, and "no" is called the universal negative quantifier. But sometimes, a negative sentence negates the predicate from some subjects, as if you say: "Not all men write", "Some men write not", or "Some men do not write". This is called the particular negative. And there is no difference to us between these three expressions of particular negation, but we always choose an expression that signifies a particular negation: "not all", "some not". "Not all" is called the particular negative quantifier. Thus, there are four quantifiers: "all", "some", "none", and "not all".
And there are four types of quantified sentences: universal affirmative, particular affirmative, universal negative, and particular negative.
If the subject is not joined with any quantifier, such as "the man writes", we call this an indefinite sentence, I mean to say: it is indefinite and not defined by a quantifier. Its significance is always like that of a particular sentence, be it affirmative or negative. If we say: "Men write", its power is equal to that of "some men". Likewise, if we say: "Men do not write", it is as if we said: "Not all men write". And when the subject is a specific individual, as if we say: "Reuven is alive" or: "Shim'on is wise" or "Levi writes", we call that a specific sentence.
So there are, by necessity, six types of sentences: universal affirmative, universal negative, particular affirmative, particular negative, indefinite – whose power is that of a particular sentence, be it affirmative or negative, or specific [sentence] – which is also either affirmative or negative (and always particular).
We call whatever the sentence says in terms of universality and particularity the sentence's "quantity". And we call whatever it says in terms of affirmation or negation the sentence's "quality". For example, if we say: "All men are alive" – the quantity is universal and the quality is affirmative. But if we say: "Some men do not write" – the quantity is particular and the quality is negative.
All the terms whose meaning is defined in this chapter are fourteen: affirmative, negative, universal affirmative, particular affirmative, universal negative, particular negative, indefinite, specific, the universal affirmative quantifier, the particular affirmative quantifier, the universal negative quantifier, the particular negative quantifier, sentence quantity, and sentence quality.

Gate 3

1. The predicate of any sentence is [primarily] an active or passive verb. And that which is joined with it is called "a secondary clause", no matter whether it is affirmative or negative. For example, if we say: "Reuven got up", or if we say: "Reuven killed Shim'on" – all these are called secondary clauses, since none of them need a third expression to tie their predicate to their subject to make known what the predicate is of the clause. However, if there is a predicate of the clause, we call it a "tertiary clause". This is as if we say: "Reuven is standing". This word does not say anything about the connection between the predicate of this clause and its subject, concerning at what time it existed: whether Reuven is currently standing or if he was standing in the past or if he will be standing in the future. It (establishing at what time the predicate applies to the subject) is impossible without a third expression that joins the predicate with the subject at a specific time, be it past or future, as if we say: "Reuven is currently standing" or "was standing" or "will be found standing". It is the same to us whether it was expressed as such or not (since the sentence provides information even without the tertiary clause). Therefore, we call this the "tertiary clause". 
2. The expression that ties the object to the subject at a specific time, past of future, is called an expression of existence which is past or present or future and that which pertains to them for they connote the existence of the object by the subject at a specific time. 
3. If there would be with the object of the clause a word it would connote the quality of existence of the object for the subject like we could say "possible", and "impossible", and "endure", and "forced", and "obligate", and "deride", and "pleasant", and "fitting", and "necessary" and the like. Occasionally, these words and their like enter the secondary clause or the tertiary clause. We call these words and their like the "odds". When we say "it is possible to write", "it is possible to ride". "Possible" is an "odd". As we would say "every man lives involuntarily" observe it is said that the cause is "involuntarily" so it is an "odd". We could say "Reuben needs to be standing", "Reuben derides cursing", "Reuben needs to learn", "Reuben needs to do this", all of these are called "odds". 
4. We call an action a verb and actions verbs.
5. Observe how all of these names whose meaning was explained in this gate are five. They are: "second clause", "tertiary clause", "odd", "verb", "expression of existence". 

Gate 4

1. All two clauses, which have the same subject and object except that one includes and one excludes, these two clauses are called "opposers". Inclusion and exclusion are called "opposing". An example is what we would say "Reuben is a sage" or "Reuben is not a sage" or "the man is writing" or "the man is not writing". These two clauses are called "opposers" and so too all that is of the like.
2. However, if there would be an opposition between two clauses that have "circumstances" this would merit a unique name. This is since two opposing clauses that each have a "general circumstance" like we would say "every man lives" and "no man lives" these two clauses are called "opposites" and this opposition is called "an opposite". If each one has a "partial circumstance" like we would say "some men write" and "some men do not write" these are called "interchangeable"(literally "instead of opposites").
3. If one of the two has a general circumstance and one has a partial circumstance then they are called "contradictory clauses". This concept is called "contradiction". These are the two types: the first type is including generally and the one is excluding partially as we would say "every man lives" and "not every man lives" these two are called "contradictory". The second type is the one clause is excluding generally and the one is including partially as we would say "no man flys" and "some men fly" these two are also contradictory. ...
4. It is known that all that includes or excludes a matter for some concept that matter which it includes or excludes will not be lacking either necessity towards itself or possibility or impossibility. An example is what we would say "all men live" this clause is called a "necessity". If we would say "some men write" this clause is called a "possibility". If we would say "all men fly" this clause is called an "impossibility". We call the included and impossible a "necessity" as we would say "man lives" necessarily and "man does not fly" a necessity. We say for instance about an infant Reuben "this Reuben writes" or "this Reuben does not write" this clause is called "a realistic possibility". However, when for instance we are discussing Ezra the Scribe at the time of his existence we cannot call this clause a possibility rather we call it a "necessitating" clause or an "existing" clause. Since all "possibilities" are realistically possible in the future before it is realized to the inclusion or exclusion. Once the reality is determined the possibility is gone because Reuben that stands near us is standing and the standing is not a possibility rather it is alike to a matter that is included at this moment.
5. All the names that their concepts were explained in this gate are twelve. These are they: opposition, opposite, contradiction, oppositions, opposites,     interchangables, type one contradictions, type two contradictions, impossibilities, possibilities, necessity, necessitating/existing.          

Gate 5



Gate 6

[Even] upon little contemplation, it [becomes] evident that from [the combination of] two distinct statements nothing [further] may be concluded (lit. "affirmed"). If we say, for example, "All humans are alive", "Every fire is hot" and "All snow is cold", and even if [we] added many [more] distinct statements, not a single thing could be concluded from all of them taken together. But if [two statements] have something in common, to the point where another statement may be concluded from them, the combination (lit. "assembly") of these two statements is called a "syllogism". Each one of these two statements is then called a "proposition", and the third statement that is affirmed by the combination (lit. "connection") of the two propositions is called a "conclusion" or "deduction". For example, when we say: "All humans are living beings" and "All living beings have sensations", what necessarily follows from this combination [of propositions] is: "All humans have sensations". This is a conclusion that is necessarily affirmed by this combination.
However, if you contemplate this example we gave, you will find that the syllogism consists of three terms (lit. "parts"), for any statement is [comprised of] two parts, as we explained; a subject and a predicate. See, there is a similarity between the two statements in one [of these] part[s], and see, [this means that] there are three terms: The part shared by the two propositions (lit. "parts") (i.e. "living beings") is called the "middle term", and the parts where they differ (i.e. the subject "humans" and the predicate "have sensations") are called the "extremes", and the combination of both [extremes] the "conclusion" or "deduction".
Contemplate also the two parts of the conclusion, for the predicate of the conclusion (i.e. "have sensations") is what is called in a syllogism the "primary" or "major term", and the proposition of the syllogism in which the primary, major term is found is called the "major premise", and the subject of the conclusion is called in a syllogism the "secondary" or "minor term", and the proposition of the syllogism in which the minor term is found is called the "minor premise". For example, if we say "Every C is A and every A is B", the necessary conclusion is: "Every C is B", or [if we say:] "Every C is A, but A is not B", if so, nothing of C is B. We call the subject in the first proposition, C, the minor term, and the proposition in which the minor term is found the minor proposition; and the predicate in the second proposition, B, the major term, and the proposition in which the major term is found the major premise; and the term shared between them, A, the middle term. The proposition in which the minor term is found is thus called the minor [premise], and the one in which the major term is found is the major [premise].
Let us repeat our example in order to further clarify the terms. The [propositions of the] syllogism we used as an example [were]: "All humans are living beings" and "All living beings have sensations". The conclusion from this syllogism was "All humans have sensations". This syllogism has three terms: "humans", "living beings", and "have sensations". The middle term is "living beings". The extremes are "humans" and "have sensations". The minor or secondary extreme is "humans" and the major or primary extreme is "have feelings". The minor premise is "All humans are living beings" and the major premise is "All living beings have sensations".
See, the meaning of these terms has been clarified, and they are important [lit. "great"] terms the knowledge of which befits [anyone who engages] in the art of logic.
See, the sum of the terms that were clarified in this chapter is eleven: "syllogism", "proposition", "conclusion", "deduction", "middle term", "primary extreme", "secondary extreme", "major extreme", "minor extreme", "major premise", "minor premise".