Treatise on Logic
מילות הגיון
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Treatise on Logic

Introduction







Gate 1

The name, which is called in Arabic grammar "the beginning", is what we call in logic the subject [the Hebrew term literally means "carrier"]. And what is called in Arabic grammar "the story about the beginning", is called in logic the predicate [the Hebrew term literally means "carried"]. Whether the predicate is a name, a verb, or a different word, or a phrase - all that is called the predicate. It doesn't matter if the story is positive or negative. For example is we say "Reuven stands". "Reuven" is the subject. "Stands" - the predicate. And also "Reuven doesn't stand". "Reuven" is the subject, "doesn't stand" the predicate. If we say "Reuven stood or will stand", "Reuven" is the subject, "stood or will stand" - the predicate. And if we say "Reuven is in the house", "Reuven" - subject, "in the house" - predicate. And this is whatever the story is a noun, a verb, or whatever phrase - all of this is called predicate.
Any speech, positive or negative, made of a subject and a predicate, is called a statement [literally, "judgement"]. A statement always has two parts, the subject and the predicate. Even if there are a lot of words in the statement, it only has those two parts. For example, take "Reuven the Hebrew who stood in the house of Shim'on killed the son of Laban the Aramean". The subject is "Reuven the Hebrew who stood in the house of Shim'on", and the predicate is "killed the son of Laban the Aramean".
In this chapter [literally, gate] teaches the terms "subject", "predicate", and "statement". 

Gate 2

Every sentence either connects the subject and predicate, such as: "Reuven is smart" or "Shimon is standing" or  disconnects them, such as saying: "Reuven isn't smart" or "Shimon did not stand". A connecting sentence is called an affirmative sentence, and a disconnecting sentence is called a negative sentence. Sometimes the affirmative sentence connects the predicate to all subjects, such as "every man is alive", this is called a universal affirmative sentence. The word "all" is called the universal affirmative quantifier. Sometimes the affirmative sentence connects the predicate to some subjects, such as "some men write". This is called the particular affirmative. "Some" is called the particular affirmative quantifier.  Sometimes a negative sentence disconnects all subjects from the predicate, for example "no animal is made of stone". This is called the universal negative. "No" is the universal negative quantifier. Sometimes a negative sentence disconnects some subjects, for example "not all men write", "some men don't write", etc. . This is called the particular negative. This is called the particular negative quantifier. The four quantifiers are "all", "some", "none", and "not all".
There are four types of sentences with quantifiers: universal affirmative, particular affirmative, universal negative, and particular negative.
If the subject doesn't have a quantifier, such as "the man writes", this is a non quantified sentence. Such sentences are always particular, whether affirmative or negative. If we say "the man writes", it means "some men". If we say "the man doesn't write", it means "not all men write". If the subject is a specific individual, such as "Reuven is alive" or "Shimon is smart" or "Levi writes", that is a specific sentence.
So there are six types of sentences: universal affirmative, universal negative, particular affirmative, or particular negative. An unquantified sentence is a particular sentence, whether affirmative or negative. A specific sentence is also a particular, either affirmative or negative.
We call whatever the sentence says about the amount of the subject, "the sentence's quantity". And whatever it says about whether it is affirmative or negative, "the sentence's quality". For example, in "all men are alive" the quantity is universal and the quality is affirmative. When we say "some men don't write", the quantity is particular and the quality is negative.
These are the fourteen terms explained in this chapter: affirmative, negative, universal affirmative, particular affirmative, universal negative, particular negative, unquantified, specific, the universal affirmative quantifier, the particular affirmative quantifier, the universal negative quantifier, the particular negative quantifier, sentence quantity, and sentence quality.

Gate 3

1. Any clause that its subject is with a verb (or passive verb, acting or being acted upon) and that which goes with them is called "a secondary clause" wether it is including or excluding. An example is what we would say "Reuben stood" or we would say "Reuben was a killer to Simon". All these are called secondary clauses since none of them need a third expression to tie the subject to the object to make known what the object is of the clause. However, if the object of the clause is extant it is called a tertiary. This is what we would say "Reuben is standing" which is "Reuben" that is the one that is "standing", there. The word does not imply which time was the connection between the object and the subject of the clause. If Reuben is currently standing or if he was standing in the past or if he will be standing in the future. It becomes impossible to interpret without a third expression that could tie the object with the subject at a specific time whether past or future. Like we could say "Reuben is now standing" or "he was standing" or "he will be found standing". It is equal to us whether it was expressed as such or not. It is the same to us if it was expressly mentioned or not expressly mentioned what time the action was taking place. This is therefore called the tertiary. 
2. The expression that ties the object to the subject at a specific time, past of future, is called an expression of existence which is past or present or future and that which pertains to them for they connote the existence of the object by the subject at a specific time. 
3. If there would be with the object of the clause a word it would connote the quality of existence of the object for the subject like we could say "possible", and "impossible", and "endure", and "forced", and "obligate", and "deride", and "pleasant", and "fitting", and "necessary" and the like. Occasionally, these words and their like enter the secondary clause or the tertiary clause. We call these words and their like the "odds". When we say "it is possible to write", "it is possible to ride". "Possible" is an "odd". As we would say "every man lives involuntarily" observe it is said that the cause is "involuntarily" so it is an "odd". We could say "Reuben needs to be standing", "Reuben derides cursing", "Reuben needs to learn", "Reuben needs to do this", all of these are called "odds". 
4. We call an action a verb and actions verbs.
5. Observe how all of these names whose meaning was explained in this gate are five. They are: "second clause", "tertiary clause", "odd", "verb", "expression of existence". 

Gate 4

1. All two clauses, which have the same subject and object except that one includes and one excludes, these two clauses are called "opposers". Inclusion and exclusion are called "opposing". An example is what we would say "Reuben is a sage" or "Reuben is not a sage" or "the man is writing" or "the man is not writing". These two clauses are called "opposers" and so too all that is of the like.
2. However, if there would be an opposition between two clauses that have "circumstances" this would merit a unique name. This is since two opposing clauses that each have a "general circumstance" like we would say "every man lives" and "no man lives" these two clauses are called "opposites" and this opposition is called "an opposite". If each one has a "partial circumstance" like we would say "some men write" and "some men do not write" these are called "interchangeable"(literally "instead of opposites").
3. If one of the two has a general circumstance and one has a partial circumstance then they are called "contradictory clauses". This concept is called "contradiction". These are the two types: the first type is including generally and the one is excluding partially as we would say "every man lives" and "not every man lives" these two are called "contradictory". The second type is the one clause is excluding generally and the one is including partially as we would say "no man flys" and "some men fly" these two are also contradictory. ...
4. It is known that all that includes or excludes a matter for some concept that matter which it includes or excludes will not be lacking either necessity towards itself or possibility or impossibility. An example is what we would say "all men live" this clause is called a "necessity". If we would say "some men write" this clause is called a "possibility". If we would say "all men fly" this clause is called an "impossibility". We call the included and impossible a "necessity" as we would say "man lives" necessarily and "man does not fly" a necessity. We say for instance about an infant Reuben "this Reuben writes" or "this Reuben does not write" this clause is called "a realistic possibility". However, when for instance we are discussing Ezra the Scribe at the time of his existence we cannot call this clause a possibility rather we call it a "necessitating" clause or an "existing" clause. Since all "possibilities" are realistically possible in the future before it is realized to the inclusion or exclusion. Once the reality is determined the possibility is gone because Reuben that stands near us is standing and the standing is not a possibility rather it is alike to a matter that is included at this moment.
5. All the names that their concepts were explained in this gate are twelve. These are they: opposition, opposite, contradiction, oppositions, opposites,     interchangables, type one contradictions, type two contradictions, impossibilities, possibilities, necessity, necessitating/existing.          