Seder Olam Rabbah
סדר עולם רבה
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Seder Olam Rabbah

Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3


... The judgment of the wicked in Gehinnom lasts twelve months, as it says “And it shall be from new moon to new moon…” (Yeshayahu 66:23) R’ Yochanan ben Nuri says: from Pesach until Atzeret (Shavuot), as it says “…and from Sabbath to Sabbath…” (ibid.) After twelve months the souls of the sinners of Israel who transgressed the Torah and the commandments are consumed and their bodies are consumed and they are turned to dust. Gehinnom spits them out and the wind scatters them underneath the feet of the righteous, as it says “And you shall crush the wicked, for they will be as ash under the soles of your feet…” (Malachi 3:21) But those who separated from the ways of the community, like the Sadducees, and the betrayers and the hypocrites and the heretics, and those who ‘spread their terror in the land of the living,’ and those who denied the resurrection, and those who say Torah is not from heaven, and those who scoff at the words of the Sages – Gehinnom is locked before them and they are judged there forever, as it says “And they shall go out and see the corpses of the people who rebelled against Me…” (Yeshayahu 66:24) Not only this, but the netherworld will cease to be but they will not cease to be, as it says “…and their form will outlast the grave as his dwelling place (zevul).” (Tehillim 49:15) From His dwelling place He will wear out their form, and their form will wear out the netherworld. What caused this to happen to them? Because they stretched out their hands against the dwelling place, as it says ‘as his dwelling place,’ and there is no dwelling place other than the Holy Temple, as it says “I have surely built You a house to dwell in…” (Melachim I 8:13)

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29


“And in the first year of Cyrus, the king of Persia, at the completion of the word of the Lord from the mouth of Jeremiah, the Lord aroused… So said Cyrus, the king of Persia… Who is among you of all His people… And the heads of the families of Judah and Benjamin and the priests and the Levites arose…” (Ezra 1:1-5) “…forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty. Besides their slaves…” (Ezra 2:64-65) This was the overall count, but in specifics of the count they are only thirty thousand three hundred and sixty. Where did the other twelve thousand go? These are the members of the other tribes who went up. “And they set the altar on its bases… And they gave money to the quarries…” (Ezra 3:1-7) Cyrus reigned for three truncated years. “And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign… Then the work of the House of God, which was in Jerusalem, was stopped…” (Ezra 4:6-24) “In the third year of his reign, he made a banquet…” (Esther 1:3) Esther was hidden in Shushan the capitol for four years, “So Esther was taken to King Ahasuerus…” (Esther 2:16) Haman gathered spoils against Mordecai for five years, “In the first month, which is the month of Nisan, in the twelfth year of King Ahasuerus…” (Esther 3:7) On the thirteenth of Nisan Haman wrote the letters “…to destroy, kill, and cause to perish all the Jews…” (Esther 3:13) On the fifteenth of Nisan Esther went in to the king. On the sixteenth of Nisan they hung Haman. On the twenty-third of Nisan Mordecai wrote letters to contradict Haman’s decree. On the thirteenth of Adar “And the Jews smote all their enemies…” (Esther 9:5) They killed five hundred in Shushan, and they hung the ten sons of Haman because “…they wrote an accusation against the dwellers of Judea and Jerusalem.” (Ezra 4:6) “On that day, the number of those slain in Shushan the capital came before the king.” (Esther 9:11) And at that time in the coming year, it says “Now, Queen Esther, the daughter of Avichayil, and Mordecai the Jew wrote down…” (Esther 9:29) Behold, it says “For at the completion of seventy years of Babylon…” (Jeremiah 29:10) and “…since the destruction of Jerusalem seventy years.” (Daniel 9:2) Israel spent fifty-two years after the destruction of the Temple under the rule of the Chaldeans, and then they went up. Three years of Cyrus, fourteen of Ahasuerus, two of Darius. In the second year of Darius, the Temple was rebuilt. So Zechariah said “And the angel of the Lord replied and said, ‘O Lord of Hosts! How long will You not have mercy on Jerusalem and upon the cities of Judah, upon whom You are wroth for seventy years already?’” (Zechariah 1:12) The Temple stood for four years, as it says “And the completion of this House…” (Ezra 6:15) And at that time in the coming year Ezra came up from Babylon with a new group of exiles, as it says “Ezra ascended from Babylon… And there ascended from the Children of Israel… in the seventh year of King Artaxerxes… For on the first of the first month… For Ezra had prepared his heart…” (Ezra 7:6-10) He came and separated Israel from the foreign women.