Yesod HaTeshuvah
יסוד התשובה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Yesod_HaTeshuvah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Yesod HaTeshuvah

The Lord sent a message through His servants the prophets, and specifically through the prophet Ezekiel: (Ezekiel 18:30-31) "Saith the Lord GOD: Return ye, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions; so shall they not be a stumblingblock of iniquity unto you. Cast away from you all your transgressions, wherein ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit; for why will ye die, O house of Israel?" A person who has sinned and transgressed, but who seeks refuge under the wings of the Divine Presence and enters the path of repentance, I will instruct and guide along this path. On that day, they will cast away all their sins, and will be as if they were born anew that very day, with neither merit nor demerit. That day will be the beginning of their actions. On that day, he will pave his paths so as not to deviate from the way of goodness. This path will lead him to complete repentance, for he will see himself as having cast off the burden of iniquities and the weight of sins. He should not let his thoughts be frightened and not allow himself to repent because he is ashamed of his sins, thinking, "How can I dare to return to Him after having sinned so greatly? I have transgressed and repeated my transgressions countless times. How can I come before Him with my head bowed like a guilty thief? I am embarrassed to stand before Him! How can I then trample His courtyard and how can I keep His laws?" Let him not think this way, for the tempter sits like a fly at the entrance of the heart, renewing its attacks every day, watching and seeking to cause him to stumble, and drawing his heart toward this evil counsel. Rather, he should consider the nature of the Creator, blessed be He: His hand is outstretched to welcome the repentant. Therefore, it is best for him to cast away his sins and make for himself a new heart. And so they should do on the day of their purification. On the day of purity, he should voluntarily offer his spirit to be a servant to his Creator, and he should pour out his supplication before his Creator and say: