Baal Shem Tov
בעל שם טוב
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Baal_Shem_Tov
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Baal Shem Tov

Introduction



Kuntres Meirat Einayim



Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Channukah



Vayigash



Vayechi



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3

Issachar is a strong-boned ass, crouching down between the stables (Gen. 49:14). In the name of Rabbi Israel Ba’al Shem, on the verse Issachar is a strong-boned [garem] donkey: that is to say, there is reward [s’khar] by way of that which the “donkey” causes [gorem]. (Tzava'at HaRivash p.12b)

Comment 4

In the name of the Ba’al Shem Tov, this is the explanation: “There is reward that the ‘donkey’ [hamor] causes,” meaning by way of food and drink, which are physical [homer] matters, he causes this reward – by way of his elevating to the Cause of Elevation the holy spark that was crouching down between the stables, which was among the lower elements. (Or HaGanuz le-Tzadikim, Vayehi)

Comment 5

It is stated in the Talmud: “The Torah has mercy on Israel’s money” (Rosh HaShanah 27a), and why so? Because this is an important principle, that whatever thing a person wears, or eats, or uses as a tool – he benefits from the life-force that is within that thing; for without the spirituality that thing would have no existence, and there [in the thing] are holy sparks relevant to the root of his soul. And I heard that for this reason there is a person who loves a certain thing, and there is a person who hates that thing and loves another thing; and when he uses that tool, or eats foods even for his body’s needs, he fixes the sparks. For afterward he serves [God], with that same power that comes to his body from that food or clothing or other things, with that power he serves Blessed God, and we find that through this [the sparks] are fixed. Therefore sometimes it happens that when he has already finished fixing all the sparks that were in that thing, which were related to the root of his soul, then Blessed God takes that tool from him and gives it to someone else, since the sparks that [remain] in that tool are relevant to a different root.
And Rabbi Israel Ba’al Shem, peace be upon him, said that people eat and people drink and people use [tools], meaning the sparks that are in those things; therefore a person must be sensitive about his tools and everything else that he has, meaning from the side of the sparks that are within them, in order to have mercy on the holy sparks. (Tzava'at HaRivash p.13a)

Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Shavuot



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur



Ha'Azinu



Succot



V'Zot HaBerachah



Esther



Song of Songs



Ruth



Lamentations



Ecclesiastes

