Baal Shem Tov
בעל שם טוב
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Baal Shem Tov

Introduction



Kuntres Meirat Einayim



Bereshit



Comment 1

1. With the help of Hashem Yisbarach, in His Holy United name...
2. Breishet. I received from the Rav Hamochiach (preacher or reprove) who said in the name of the Baal Shem Tov, that when the Messiah comes, speedily in our days, the whole Torah will be explained (or interpreted) from the beginning to the end, on all the combinations in each and every word. And after this, he will make from the whole Torah one word, and he will elevate combinations without number, and he will expound upon all the combinations. (Teshuot Chen, Parshah Tazria). 

Comment 2

1. "In the beginning G-d created", etc. To resolve the problem that was difficult for all the Rishonim, may their memories be for a blessing, why did the Holy One not create the world before this time? In that this action/deed is immediate good from absence. And why did His Will, may He be blessed, change, will to will in the moment of creation and not before this, behold He, blessed is His Name, is not a Master of Change? Of this it is written (Malachi 3:6) "I Hashem do not (or have not) change".
2. And the solution of this [problem is] that He does not resemble the acts of flesh and blood. The wisdom that he has now he did not have from before. And his wisdom he acquired (or possessed), and he is (at) a disadvantage. For instance, because of what he needs prior to living in it, therefore he acquires wisdom to build himself a house, then he builds himself the house. But He, praise His Name, His Wisdom is intrinsic and not acquired and He is not at a disadvantage. And therefore this is the Will that rose in His Will to create the world, not that he renewed for Himself this Will at the time of the creation of the world. Rather, like He is ancient, so his His Will is ancient. And this (early desire) was His immediate Will to create the World in this moment when He created it and not before. And therefore in the moment the world was created it was created truly in that moment and in that time, just like it was in His Will before to create it. Specifically in this moment, and if so reasonably He had no change in His Will whatsoever.

Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Channukah



Vayigash



Vayechi



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3

Issachar is a strong-boned ass, crouching down between the stables (Gen. 49:14). In the name of Rabbi Israel Ba’al Shem, on the verse Issachar is a strong-boned [garem] donkey: that is to say, there is reward [s’khar] by way of that which the “donkey” causes [gorem]. (Tzava'at HaRivash p.12b)

Comment 4

In the name of the Ba’al Shem Tov, this is the explanation: “There is reward that the ‘donkey’ [hamor] causes,” meaning by way of food and drink, which are physical [homer] matters, he causes this reward – by way of his elevating to the Cause of Elevation the holy spark that was crouching down between the stables, which was among the lower elements. (Or HaGanuz le-Tzadikim, Vayehi)

Comment 5

It is stated in the Talmud: “The Torah has mercy on Israel’s money” (Rosh HaShanah 27a), and why so? Because this is an important principle, that whatever thing a person wears, or eats, or uses as a tool – he benefits from the life-force that is within that thing; for without the spirituality that thing would have no existence, and there [in the thing] are holy sparks relevant to the root of his soul. And I heard that for this reason there is a person who loves a certain thing, and there is a person who hates that thing and loves another thing; and when he uses that tool, or eats foods even for his body’s needs, he fixes the sparks. For afterward he serves [God], with that same power that comes to his body from that food or clothing or other things, with that power he serves Blessed God, and we find that through this [the sparks] are fixed. Therefore sometimes it happens that when he has already finished fixing all the sparks that were in that thing, which were related to the root of his soul, then Blessed God takes that tool from him and gives it to someone else, since the sparks that [remain] in that tool are relevant to a different root.
And Rabbi Israel Ba’al Shem, peace be upon him, said that people eat and people drink and people use [tools], meaning the sparks that are in those things; therefore a person must be sensitive about his tools and everything else that he has, meaning from the side of the sparks that are within them, in order to have mercy on the holy sparks. (Tzava'at HaRivash p.13a)

Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3



Comment 4



Comment 5



Comment 6



Comment 7



Comment 8



Comment 9



Comment 10



Comment 11



Comment 12



Comment 13



Comment 14



Comment 15

And the Lord spoke to Moses face to face. Here it is written like water face to face, so answers man's heart to another (Proverbs 27:19), in the name of the Baal Shem Tov his soul in Heavenly Gardens, When a man stands in water, his shadow looks great on the water, and when the man lowers himself, the shadow becomes small, and everything that the person bends himself more in the water becomes even smaller shadow, until the person's face is on the water then the face of the shadow also comes against the person's face, yes the heart of a man to man, when a person thinks he is big, then his friend is also great, And when a person reduces himself before his friend, Then his friend also reduces himself, Until the smallest is that he can no longer reduce, Then his friend does likewise, and then the value is made, And we will make them equal, This is what Moses said, and the Lord spoke to Moses face to face when a man spoke to his neighbor, According to the smallness of a man against his neighbor, his friend is also small, Good deeds face to face, Yes Moses, since he would reduce himself against the Creator, blessed be He, Yes, as it were, the Creator reduced himself to Moses and spoke to him face to face, Found in the interior of the Creator is like a shadow made according to the value of Moses' face, And no one can do that, Only Moses, who is the knowledgable, etc.: 
(Or HaChochma P. Vayakhel)


Vayakhel



Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Shavuot



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Comment 1



Comment 2



Comment 3



Comment 4



Comment 5



Comment 6



Comment 7



Comment 8

“…lest your heart grow haughty and you forget the LORD your God…” (Devarim 8:14) They said in the gemara (Sotah 5a) This is a warning to the proud in spirit, as it is written ‘lest your heart grow haughty and you forget.’ The Rav Moshe m’Kotzi counted this as a negative commandment and wrote that God revealed to him in a dream, that the essential warning of all the Torah is the commandment to remember and that forgetting, which is its opposite, God forbid destroys the whole Torah. And the Holy Ba’al Shem Tov explained  - when the blood is clouded, then one is in the aspect of the ‘back end’ which has the numeric value of ‘and you forget’ because memory flows from the names of zachor and forgetting from the ‘back end’ of Aba and Ima which is the numeric value of ‘and you forget’ as is written in the Yichudim (Sha'ar Ruach ha-kodesh, tikun 26 (daf 17, column 3)). As it is with an individual, so it is with humanity – exile flows from forgetting and redemption from remembering. “The words of a wise man’s mouth find favor…” (Kohelet 10:12)

Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur



Ha'Azinu



Succot



V'Zot HaBerachah



Esther



Song of Songs



Ruth



Lamentations



Ecclesiastes

