Sefer HaMitzvot
ספר המצוות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Sefer HaMitzvot

Introductions

Translator's Introduction



The Rambam's Introduction



Shorashim



Shoresh 1



Introduction to the counting of the Mitzvot

And now I am going to begin mentioning every single mitzvah, and I will explain them, as I made clear at the beginning that this is the intention of the book. ... I will also explain the punishments for not doing a mitzvah or for a transgression ... And every one of those negative commandments for which we do not count a punishment among the punishments, you should know that that is like the mitzvah of a king, that for one that transgresses it we have no punishment in record. Even though for positive commandments in which one is obligated we have that one receives lashes if one refrains from observing them until that person either dies or does it, in any instance if the time is passed we refrain from doing [such punishment], like for instance a person during Sukkot who did not dwell in a sukkah, we do not lash such person due to his/her transgression, and you should know this. And I also announced the mitzvot in which women are not obligated, whether positive or negative... in several mitzvot I do not need to explain to you that they are not obligated, such as the mitzvot that deal with the temple or optional wars, because those are wordy add-ons that are superfluous, and this is also the case regarding mitzvot that only apply in the Land of Israel or when the Temple is standing. It is known that sacrifices are not done outside of the Temple area, and so too capital punishments are not judged unless the Temple is standing. And in the language of the Mechilta:  "from where do we know that we do not sentence to death unless in front of the Temple? The text says: 'from My altar you will take him to die' (Exodus 21:14) - behold, if you have the Temple you make him die, if you don't have the Temple you don't." And there too it says "from where do we know that the Sanhedrin needs to be close to the altar? From what is said: 'from My altar'." And it is known that both prophecy and kingship have been taken away from us until we refrain from our constant sins, and then He will be forgiving to us, and will merciful to us, as we have testimony regarding prophecy: "And it will be, after I pour My spirit on all flesh, your sons and your daughters will prophesy" (Joel 2:28). And regarding the return of the kingship: "On that day I will restore the fallen sukkah of David, and I will repair its breaches and set up its ruins anew, I will build it firm as in the days of old" (Amos 9:11). And it is known that war and conquering of the cities cannot happen without a king and without the advice of the Great Sanhedrin and without a High Priest, as it says "he [Joshua] shall present himself in front of Eleazar the Priest [who shall on his behalf seek the decision of the Urim]" (Numbers 27:21). And therefore it should be announced for all people that all positive commandments that are dependent on sacrifices, Temple rituals, capital punishments, Sanhedrin, prophet and king, or optional wars one does not have to say that there is no obligation regarding those unless the Temple is standing, as we explained, may we be sufficient, and rouse ourselves for it, with God's help. And now I will begin the mentioning of each and every mitzvah with the help of Shaddai.

Positive Commandments



Mitzvah 1



Mitzvah 2



Mitzvah 3

The 3rd mitzva is that we are commanded to love G‑d (exalted be He), i.e. to meditate upon and closely examine His mitzvos, His commandments, and His works, in order to understand Him; and through this understanding to achieve a feeling of ecstasy. This is the goal of the commandment to love G‑d. [We can see that meditation is the way to create this feeling of love1 from] the Sifri: "From the statement, 'You shall love G‑d your Lord'2, can I know how to love G‑d? The Torah therefore says, 'and these words which I command you today shall be upon your heart'3; i.e. that through this [meditation about His commandments] you will understand the nature of 'the One Who spoke, and thereby brought the world into being.' "From this it is clear that meditation will lead to understanding, and then a feeling of enjoyment and love will follow automatically [since the second verse explains the way to reach the goal of the previous verse.]Our Sages also said that this mitzvah includes calling out to all mankind to serve G‑d (exalted be He) and to believe in Him. This is because when you love a person, for example, you praise him and call out to others to draw close to him. So too, if you truly love G‑d — through your understanding and realization of His true existence — you will certainly spread this true knowledge that you know to the ignorant and the foolish.[We see that this mitzvah includes spreading love for G‑d to others from] the Sifri: " 'You shall love G‑d,' i.e. make Him beloved among the creatures as your father Avraham did, as it is written, 'The souls that he made in Charan.'4"The meaning of this Sifri: Avraham, as a result of his deep understanding of G‑d, acquired love for G‑d, as the verse testifies, "Avraham, who loved Me"5. This powerful love therefore caused him to call out to all mankind to believe in G‑d. So too, you shall love Him to the extent that you draw others to Him.

Mitzvah 4



Mitzvah 5

The 5th mitzvah is that we are commanded to serve G‑d (blessed be He). This commandment is repeated twice. It is stated:"And you shall serve G‑d, your L‑rd"(Exodus 23:25). And it is also stated: "And you shall serve Him"(Deuteronomy 13:5). Although this commandment is of a general nature, as explained in the Fourth Principle, [and apparently should not be included in the count of the 613 mitzvos,] nevertheless it has a specific quality, since it is the commandment to pray. [We see that "service" is not just a general command from the following statements:] The Sifri says, "The verse, 'And to serve Him' means prayer." The Sages also said, "The verse, 'And to serve Him' means Torah study. In the Mishnah of Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Rabbi Yosi HaG'lili, the Sages said, "What is the biblical source to include prayer among the mitzvos? From the verse, 'You shall fear G‑d, your L‑rd, and you shall serve Him.' " They also said, "Serve Him through His Torah; serve Him in His Temple." This [statement, 'serve Him in His Temple,'] means that one's goal should be to pray in the Temple or in the direction of the Temple, as King Solomon, peace be upon him, explained.

Mitzvah 6



Mitzvah 7



Mitzvah 8



Mitzvah 9



Mitzvah 10

That which He commanded us to read Shema in the evening and morning and he said [in the torah] "and you shall speak of them". And the laws of this of this mitzvah were already explained in tractate Berakhot (page 21) and there it explains that reading the Shema is a biblical commandment. And in the Tosefta is states "just as when the torah was given the reading of the shema was established, so too  the sages established times for prayer", this means to say that the times for prayer are not biblical, rather the obligation of prayer itself is biblical, as we explained, and the sages, may their memory be a blessing, organized times for them. And this is the concept that was stated (TB Berakhot 26b) "The prayers were established according to the Tamid offerings", which means to say that they established times [for prayer] according to the times for the sacrifices. And women are not obligated in this commandment. (Parshat Va'etchanan; Rambam Sefer Ahava, Hilchot Keriat Shema Chapter 1).

Mitzvah 11



Mitzvah 12



Mitzvah 13



Mitzvah 14



Mitzvah 15



Mitzvah 16



Mitzvah 17



Mitzvah 18



Mitzvah 19



Mitzvah 20

The twentieth commandment is that we're commanded to build a Beit Ha-Behira for [Divine] service, in it will be sacrifices and an eternal burning of fire and to it will be the travel and pilgrimage on the festivals and gatherings every year. This is what the Torah said "make for me a Temple."

Mitzvah 21



Mitzvah 22



Mitzvah 23



Mitzvah 24



Mitzvah 25



Mitzvah 26



Mitzvah 27



Mitzvah 28



Mitzvah 29



Mitzvah 30



Mitzvah 31



Mitzvah 32



Mitzvah 33



Mitzvah 34



Mitzvah 35



Mitzvah 36



Mitzvah 37



Mitzvah 38



Mitzvah 39



Mitzvah 40



Mitzvah 41



Mitzvah 42



Mitzvah 43



Mitzvah 44



Mitzvah 45



Mitzvah 46



Mitzvah 47



Mitzvah 48



Mitzvah 49



Mitzvah 50

That is that He commanded to offer an additional sacrifice on the holiday of Sukkot. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "You shall offer a burnt-offering" (Numbers 29:13). And that is the additional offering of the holiday. (See Parashat Pinchas; Mishneh Torah, Daily Offerings and Additional Offerings 9.)

Mitzvah 51



Mitzvah 52



Mitzvah 53



Mitzvah 54



Mitzvah 55



Mitzvah 56



Mitzvah 57



Mitzvah 58

That is that He commanded us to eat from the meat of the second-Pesach offering on the night of the fifteenth of Iyar over matzah and bitter herbs. And that is His saying, "upon matzoh and bitter herbs shall they eat it" (Numbers 9:11). And they said that women are not obligated in it. For just as its slaughter is not obligatory for them - as we explained (in the previous commandment) - so too is its eating, without a doubt, not obligatory. (See Parashat Behaalotecha; Mishneh Torah, Paschal Offering 1.)

Mitzvah 59

And that is that He commanded us to blow with trumpets in the Temple during the bringing of the holiday offerings. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "And on your joyous occasions and on your festivals [...], you shall blow, etc." (Numbers 10:10). In the explanation (Rosh Hashanah 26b), they said that this commandment (on public fasts) is with the trumpets. And the regulations of this commandment were already explained in the Sifrei, in Rosh Hashanah and in Taanit. And likewise are we commanded to blow with trumpets at times of need and of distress, when we yell out in front of God, may He be exalted. And that is His saying, "When you are at war in your land against an aggressor who attacks you, etc." (Numbers 10:9).  (See Parashat Behaalotecha; Mishneh Torah, Fasts 1.)

Mitzvah 60

That is that we were commanded that any animal sacrifice that we offer be eight days old or more - and not less. And this is [the commandment of] that which is lacking time in its body. And that is His saying, "it shall stay seven days with its mother" (Leviticus 22:27). And this commandment has already been repeated with a different language. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "seven days it shall stay with its mother" (Exodus 22:29). And this commandment completely includes all of the sacrifices. And there is a proof that it is not accepted before then from His saying, "and from the eighth day, it will be accepted as a burnt-sacrifice to the Lord" (Leviticus 22:27). Behold the prohibition of offering that which is lacking time has already been demonstrated. However it is a negative commandment derived from a positive commandment. Hence we do not give lashes for it. So one who sacrifices [an animal] which is lacking time does not receive lashes, as it is explained in the chapter [entitled] <i>Oto ve'et Beno</i> (Chullin 80b). And there, it is said, "Leave that which is lacking time, as Scripture rectified it by a positive commandment." And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in the Sifrei and at the end of Tractate Zevachim. (See Parashat Emor; Mishneh Torah, Things Forbidden on the Altar 3).

Mitzvah 61



Mitzvah 62



Mitzvah 63



Mitzvah 64



Mitzvah 65



Mitzvah 66

That is that He commanded us with the process of the peace-offering sacrifices - according to the description that is mentioned - with His saying, "And if his sacrifice is a sacrifice of peace-offerings" (Leviticus 3:1). And He said further with the completion of the process, "And this is the law of the sacrifice of the peace-offerings [...]. If he offers it for thanksgiving" (Leviticus 7:11-12). These four processes - meaning the process of the burnt-offering, the sin-offering, the guilt-offering and the peace offerings - are all the processes of sacrifices. For all animal sacrifices that are sacrificed by an individual or the community are perforce one of these four types. However the guilt-offering is exceptional, in that it is always the sacrifice of an individual - as we have explained many times. And Tractate [Zevachim] also includes the laws of these four commandments, and those things which are connected to them by being similar to them in terms of obligation and exemption; the corrupted process and the one that goes smoothly. (See Parashat Vayikra; Mishneh Torah, Sacrificial Procedure 9.)

Mitzvah 67



Mitzvah 68



Mitzvah 69



Mitzvah 70



Mitzvah 71

And that is that He commanded us that one who does certain sins must offer a guilt-offering sacrifice. And that is what is called a definite guilt-offering. And the sins for which one is liable for this sacrifice are misappropriation; theft; one who has sexual intercourse with a designated maidservant; and who swears falsely with an oath over a deposit. And that is one who misappropriated in error and derived benefit worth a <i>perutah</i> (a small coin) from sanctified property - whether sanctified for Temple upkeep or whether sanctified for the altar; one who robbed the value of a <i>perutah</i> or more from his fellow and took an oath; one who had sexual intercourse with a designated maidservant, whether inadvertent or volitional. [In these cases,] he is obligated to offer a sacrifice for his sin, and it is not a sin-offering sacrifice; indeed, it is a guilt-offering, and it is called a definite guilt-offering. And He said regarding misappropriation, "and he sinned in error, etc. and he shall bring his guilt offering" (Leviticus 5:15). He [also] said, "and he denied his kinsman [...] and swore falsely, etc. his guilt offering shall he bring." (Leviticus 5:21-25). And He said, "and she is a designated maidservant for a man [...]. And he shall bring his guilt offering" (Leviticus 19:20-21) And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Keritot. (See Parashat Vayikra; Mishneh Torah, Offerings for Unintentional Transgressions 9.)

Mitzvah 72

That is that He also commanded us to bring a variable burnt-sacrifice for certain specific sins. And the sins for which one is liable for this sacrifice are impurification of the Temple and its sanctified objects; an oath of speech; and an oath of testimony. And that is one who is impure from one of the primary sources of impurity - as we set out in the introduction to the Order of Purities (Commentary on the Mishnah) - and entered the Temple or ate sanctified [food] inadvertently; and that is impurification of the Temple and its sanctified objects. Or that he swore falsely, as with an oath of speech that he inadvertently transgressed; or if he swore falsely with an oath of testimony - whether inadvertently or volitionally. Behold for any of these actions, he must bring a sacrifice that is called a variable burnt-offering. And that is His saying, "And if a person sin, and hear the voice of adjuration [... Or when a person touches any unclean thing...] and it be hid from him [and he come to know of it, and be guilty]. Or if a person swear, speaking with his lips [...] And it shall be, when he shall be guilty [...]. And he shall bring his guilt offering [...]. But if his means do not suffice" (Leviticus 5:1-7). And for this reason is it called a variable burnt-offering - because it does not remain one type, but rather he will once bring this type and another time that type. Everything is according to what the means of the sinner, who is obligated to offer the sacrifice, suffice. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Keritot and in Shevuot. (See Parashat Vayikra; Mishneh Torah, Offerings for Unintentional Transgressions 10.)

Mitzvah 73

And that is that He commanded us to confess the transgressions and sins that we have done before God and to say them together with [our] repentance. And that is confession. And its intent is that one say, "Please, Lord, I have sinned, I have transgressed, I have rebelled and I have done such and such." And he should prolong the statement and request forgiveness about this matter according to the polish of his speech. And you should know that even the sins for which one is liable for the types of sacrifices that are mentioned - that He said that one offer them and it atones for him - do not suffice with the sacrifice when it is is without confession. And that is His saying, "Speak to the children of Israel [saying], a man or woman who commits from any of the sins of man [...] And they shall confess the sins that they did" (Number 5:6-7). And the language of the Mekhilta is, "Since it is stated (Leviticus 5:5), 'and he shall confess that which he has sinned upon it' - it is to be upon the sin-offering when it is in existence, not after it has been slaughtered. It is only understood that an individual confesses for entering the Temple [impure]" - for this verse appears in Parashat Vayikra about one who impurifies the Temple and its sanctified objects, and that which is mentioned with it, as we explained; and so the Mekhilta there raises the possibility that we would only learn the obligation for confession from Scripture about one who impurifies the Temple. "From where are you to include all the other commandments? [Hence] we learn to say, 'Speak to the children of Israel [...]. And they shall confess.' And from where [do we know] even [sins that bring punishments of] excision and death penalties of the court? It states, 'the sins,' to include negative commandments; 'that they did,' that they did to include positive commandments." And there it says, "'From any of the sins of man' - for theft, for robbery, for evil speech; 'to commit a trespass' - to include one who swears falsely and the blasphemer; 'and be guilty' - to include all those guilt of death penalties. It might be even those who are killed according to the testimony of colluding ones? I only said, 'and that man be guilty.'" That means to say that he is not obligated to confess when he knows that he has not sinned, but rather what was testified against him is false.  an extension of 


Mitzvah 74



Mitzvah 75

That is that He commanded us that any woman who is healed from a discharge offer a sacrifice and that is two turtledoves or two young pigeons. And this is the sacrifice of the <i>zavah</i>; and she is lacking [full] atonement until she offers it. And perhaps the questioner will challenge me and say, "Since the sacrifice of the<i>zav</i> is like the sacrifice of the <i>zavah</i>, why don't you [just] count the type of sacrifice that one is obligated, regardless of who is obligated, like you did with the sacrifice of the sin-offering, the definite guilt-offering, the variable guilt-offering and the variable sacrifice? As you counted each and every one as only commandment, each; and you did not concern yourself with the multiplicity of transgressions for which one is liable, such that one is liable a sacrifice for each and every one of them. So it would have been appropriate for you not to concern yourself with the multiplicity of [classes of] people that are liable for the fowl offering."  And the verse that appears about this matter is His saying, "When she becomes clean of her discharge [...]. On the eighth day she shall take two turtledoves or two pigeons" (Leviticus 15:28-29). (See Parashat Metzora; Mishneh Torah, Offerings for Those with Incomplete Atonement 1-3.)

Mitzvah 76



Mitzvah 77



Mitzvah 78



Mitzvah 79



Mitzvah 80



Mitzvah 81



Mitzvah 82

That is that He commanded us to behead the [firstborn] donkey if we do not redeem it. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "if you do not redeem it, you must behead it" (Exodus 34:20). And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Bekhorot. And the questioner may challenge and say, "But why did you count its redemption and its beheading as two commandments; and why did you not count them as one commandment, such that its beheading be from the laws of the commandment - like [you explained] in the seventh principle?" Behold God knows that the analogy requires this, were it not that we found with our Rabbis a language that indicates that they are two commandments. And that is their saying, "The commandment of redemption precedes the commandment of beheading; the commandment of levirate marriage precedes the commandment of <i>chalitzah</i>" (Bekhorot 13a). And just like a levirate wife is suited for either levirate marriage or <i>chalitzah</i>; and levirate marriage is one commandment and <i>chalitzah</i> is [another] commandment - so too, is a [firstborn] donkey suited for either redemption or beheading; and each of them is a commandment, as we have said. (See Parashat Ki Tissa; Mishneh Torah, Firstlings 12.)

Mitzvah 83

That is that He commanded us to bring all of the sacrifices that are incumbent upon one during the first holiday of the three pilgrim holidays that we encounter, such that none of the three pilgrim holidays pass without each one of us sacrificing any sacrifice that he is obligated. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "and there shall you come. And there you shall bring" (Deuteronomy 12:5-6). And the content of this command is that it is saying that when you come there - and that is on each of the holidays of the three pilgrim holidays - you are obligated to bring every sacrifice incumbent upon you. And the language of the Sifrei (Sifrei Devarim 63:4-5) is, "'And there shall you come. And there you shall bring.' Why is it stated? To make them obligatory on the first holiday that he encounters." And there, it says, "He is not in transgression of 'you shall not delay' (Deuteronomy 23:22) until all three of the pilgrim holidays of the whole entire year have passed him by." This means to say that he has transgressed a negative commandment [only] after three pilgrim holidays have passed him by, and he has not brought [them]. However when one holiday passed him by, he has surely violated a positive commandment. And in the Gemara, Rosh Hashanah (Rosh Hashanah 4b), [it says,] "Rabbi Meir says, 'Once [even] one holiday has passed, one transgresses, "you shall not delay."'" And it is said there, "And Rabbi Meir, what is his reason? As it is written, 'and there shall you come. And there you shall bring.' But the Rabbis [reason, this verse only] comes to [indicate] a positive commandment." Behold it has already been explained there that His saying, "and there shall you come. And there you shall bring," is a positive commandment. And that is that he bring all that He is obligated from God's laws and dispose of them on each and every holiday. And whether it is any of the types of sacrifices, monies, appraisal, consecrations, gleanings (<i>leket</i>), forgotten sheaves or corner produce (<i>peah</i>) - the dispensation of one's obligation with any of these on the first holiday that he encounters is a positive commandment, as is explained in the Gemara, Rosh Hashanah. (See Parashat Re'eh; Mishneh Torah, Sacrificial Procedure 14.)

Mitzvah 84



Mitzvah 85

That is that He commanded us to bring any sin-offering, burnt-offering, guilt-offering and peace-offerings, which we are obligated, to the [Temple]. And even when, they are outside of the Land - meaning to say, we became obligated for them outside of the Land - we are surely obligated to bring them to the [Temple]. And that is His saying, "But your consecrated things as you may have, etc." (Deuteronomy 12:26). And the language of the Sifrei (Sifrei Devarim 77:1-2) is, "'Your consecrated things' - [...] rather it must be speaking of consecrations outside of the Land. 'Shall you bear and you shall come' - this teaches that he must care for what he brought until he brings it to the Temple." And they decided there that this is however regarding the sin-offerings, burnt-offerings, guilt-offerings [and peace-offerings] that each person is obligated. (See Parashat Re'eh; Mishneh Torah, Sacrificial Procedure 10.)

Mitzvah 86



Mitzvah 87

That is that He commanded us that the substitute [of a consecrated item] be consecrated. And in the explanation in Tractate Temurah (Temurah 4b), they said that His saying, "he shall not substitute for it," is a negative commandment that is rectified by a positive commandment. And it is also said there - in order to give a reason for the one who substitutes to get lashes, even though it is a negative commandment that is rectified by a positive commandment - and they said, "A positive commandment should not come and uproot two negative commandments." That is to say, this prohibition of substitution has been repeated twice - "He may not exchange or substitute it" (Leviticus 27:10) - but [only] one positive commandment appears; and that is, "it and its substitute shall both be holy" (Leviticus 27:33). Behold what we have wanted to explain has been explained. And the laws of this commandment have already been explained in Temurah - meaning when it stands and when it does not stand  and what its law is. (See Bechukotai; Mishneh Torah, Substitution 1.)

Mitzvah 88



Mitzvah 89



Mitzvah 90



Mitzvah 91

That is that He commanded to burn leftovers (<i>notar</i>). And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "What is left over of the meat of the sacrifice shall be burned" (Leviticus 7:17). And in explanation of His [also] saying about the Pesach lamb, "You shall not leave over from it" (Exodus 12:10), they said in the Mekhilta (Mekhilta DeRabbi Shimon Bar Yochai 12:10), "It comes to give a positive commandment and a negative commandment." And in many places in Pesachim and Makkot and other places besides them, it says in explanation, that it is a negative commandment that is rectified by a positive commandment; and therefore we do not receive lashes for it. And the positive commandment is that which we mentioned, "What is left over from it, you shall burn" (Exodus 12:10). And the law of leftovers and improper (<i>pigul</i>) [sacrifices] is the same, as I will explain in the Negative Commandments (Sefer HaMitzvot, Negative Commandments 132). For the improper has already been referred to by the expression, "leftovers." And the laws of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Pesachim and at the end of Temurah. (See Parashat Tzav; Mishneh Torah, Things Forbidden on the Altar 19.)

Mitzvah 92

That is that He commanded us that a nazarite should grow his hair. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "he shall let grow untrimmed, the hair of his head " (Numbers 6:5). And the language of the Mekhilta is, "'He shall be holy' - its growth is to be in holiness; 'and he shall let grow untrimmed' - is a positive commandment. And from where [do we know that it is also] a negative commandment? [Hence] we learn to say, 'no razor shall touch his head.'" And it is said there, "This is what I have given as a positive commandment [only] - one who scrubs [his scalp] with earth and one who places herbs" - meaning when a nazarite puts them on his head to remove the hair, he would then not be transgressing the negative commandment. For he did not remove it in the manner of a razor. He did however transgress the positive commandment, which is, "he shall let grow untrimmed" - and this one did not grow [it]. As a negative commandment derived from a positive commandment is a positive commandment - that is a principle with us. And the laws of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Nazir. (See Parashat Nasso; Mishneh Torah, Nazariteship 1.) 

Mitzvah 93



Mitzvah 94



Mitzvah 95

That is that He commanded us to administer the nullification of vows - meaning the doctrine that He instructed us about these laws. However the content is not that we are obligated to annul vows no matter what. And this issue itself you should understand from me - anytime you hear me counting one of the laws [as a commandment], it [need] not be a command of a specific compulsory action. Rather it is a commandment by virtue of our being commanded to administer this law for this thing (when it arises). That the husband and the father can annul them is, behold, already explained in Scripture (Numbers 30). But the tradition comes [and informs us] that a sage can also annul a vow, as well as an oath. And the hint to this is in His saying, "he may not void his word" (Numbers 30:3) - he may not void his word, but others may void it for him. More generally, there is certainly no proof to this from Scripture; so they say (Chagigah 10a), "The annulment of vows floats in the air." And it does not have any [bona fide] support, but it is rather from the true tradition. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Nedarim. (See Parashat Matot; Mishneh Torah, Vows 12.)

Mitzvah 96



Mitzvah 97

That is that He commanded us to [administer the laws of impurity] of eight creeping creatures. This commandment includes the impurity of the creeping creature and its regulations. (See Parashat Shemini; Mishneh Torah, Other Sources of Defilement 1.)

Mitzvah 98



Mitzvah 99



Mitzvah 100

That is that He commanded us that a woman after childbirth be impure. And this commandment includes all of the regulations of a woman after childbirth. (See Parashat Metzora; Mishneh Torah, Those Who Defile Bed or Seat 5.)

Mitzvah 101



Mitzvah 102



Mitzvah 103



Mitzvah 104



Mitzvah 105



Mitzvah 106



Mitzvah 107



Mitzvah 108

That is that He commanded us and instructed us [to administer] the laws of purification water, about which they said that it renders impure in one way and purifies in another way, as is explained in the analysis of this commandment. And you should know that these thirteen types of impurities, the counting of which preceded this - they being the impurities of a carcass, of creeping animals; of foods and drinks; of a menstruant woman; of a woman after childbirth; of <i>tsaraat</i> of a person; of [<i>tsaraat</i> of garments;] of <i>tsaraat</i> of houses; of a <i>zav</i>; of a <i>zavah</i>; of semen; of a corpse; and of purifying waters - and their purification of each one of them is written in the Torah in many verses and with many laws and stipulations; as is written in Parashat Shemini, Parashat Tazria and Metzora and in Parashat, Parashat Parah. And these four sections completely include all of these impurities.  (See Parashat Chukat; Mishneh Torah, Defilement by a Corpse 1-25.)

Mitzvah 109



Mitzvah 110

And that is that He commanded us that the purification from <i>tsaraat</i> be according to the process written in Scripture (Leviticus 14). And that is [with] cedar wood, hyssop, crimson dyed cloth, two living birds and living waters and that he do everything stated with those things. And through this exact process, the man becomes pure - as Scripture explains. Behold it has already been made clear to you that there are three types of things that purify from impurity - one of them is general and two of them are specific to two types of impurity. Indeed, the general one is purification in water; the second type is the [sprinkling of] purification water, and that is something specific for the impurity of a corpse; and the third type is cedar wood, hyssop, scarlet dyed cloth, two living birds and living waters - and that is something specific for <i>tsaraat</i>. And the regulations of this commandment - meaning the purification of someone with <i>tsaraat</i> - have all already been explained in the first [chapter] of Tractate Negaim. (See Parashat Metzora; Mishneh Torah, Defilement by Leprosy 11.)

Mitzvah 111



Mitzvah 112



Mitzvah 113



Mitzvah 114



Mitzvah 115



Mitzvah 116



Mitzvah 117



Mitzvah 118

That is that we were commanded that anyone who benefits from consecrated property add a fifth; likewise if he eats consecrated food - meaning if [a non-priest] ate from the priestly tithe - inadvertently, he pays for what he ate or the measure of what he benefitted, with the addition of a fifth. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "He shall pay for that wherein he was remiss about the consecrated things, and he shall add a fifth to it" (Leviticus 5:16); as well as His saying, "But if a man eats of  consecrated things inadvertently, etc." And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Meilah and in Tracte Terumah as well. (See Parashat Vayikra; Mishneh Torah, Trespass 1.)

Mitzvah 119



Mitzvah 120



Mitzvah 121



Mitzvah 122

And that is that He commanded us to leave over the forgotten [produce]. And that is His saying, "and you have forgotten a sheaf in the field, do not turn back to get it; it shall be for the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow" (Deuteronomy 24:19). Behold, His saying, "it shall be," is the command to leave it. And it is a positive commandment; like when He said, "Leave them," - with the gleanings and the corner - it is a positive commandment, as we explained. But by Torah law, it is only practiced in the Land [of Israel]. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Peah. (See Parashat Ki Tetzeh; Mishneh Torah, Gifts to the Poor 1.)

Mitzvah 123



Mitzvah 124



Mitzvah 125



Mitzvah 126



Mitzvah 127



Mitzvah 128



Mitzvah 129

That is that He commanded the Levites to extract a tithe from the tithe that they take from Israel, and give it to the priests. And that is His saying, "Speak to the Levites and say to them, 'When you receive the tithes from the Children of Israel, etc.'" (Numbers 18:26) And Scripture explains that this is called the priestly tithe from the tithe (<i>terumat maaser</i>) and is given to a priest. And Scripture explains that this tithe is taken either from the goodly [part] of it or from the fine part of it, by its saying, "from any of its best portion (<i>chelbo</i>)" (Leviticus 18:29). And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "And you shall bear no sin by reason of it, when you have set aside from it the best of it" (Leviticus 18:32).

Mitzvah 130



Mitzvah 131



Mitzvah 132

And that is that He commanded us to tell over His kindnesses that He benefited us and saved us - and one begins with the topic of our father, Yaakov, and finishes with the toil of the Egyptians and their afflicting us - to praise Him about all of this; and to request from Him to continue the blessing, at the time that he brings the first-fruits. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "And You shall lift your voice and say before the Lord, your God,"  (Deuteronomy 26:5) and all that appears after that in this section. And all of this commandment is that which is called the recitation of the first-fruits (<i>mikra bikkurim</i>). And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Bikkurim and in the Chapter 7 of Sotah. But women are not obligated in it. (See Parashat Ki Tavo; Mishneh Torah, Second Tithes and Fourth Year's Fruit 11.)

Mitzvah 133



Mitzvah 134

That is that He commanded us to render ownerless all that grows from the ground during the sabbatical year and permit the growth of all of our lands to any person. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "But in the seventh you shall release it and let it lie fallow." And the language of the Mekhilta (Mekhilta DeRabbi Shimon Bar Yochai 23:11) is, "And were the vineyard and olive tree not in the category? So why were they specified? To compare to them: Just like the vineyard is particular in that it is a positive commandment and [if we do not let it rest], we transgress it as a negative commandment; so too everything that has the positive commandment, we would transgress a negative commandment. And the content of this statement is what I will explain. So that which He said, "But in the seventh you shall release it and let it lie fallow," includes everything that will grow from the ground in the seventh year of figs, grapes, olives, peaches, pomegranates, wheat, barley and other things.

Mitzvah 135

That is that He commanded us to rest from any agricultural work on the seventh year. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "you must cease plowing and harvesting" (Exodus 34:21). And this command has already been repeated several times: He said, "[But] in the seventh year, the land shall have a sabbath of complete rest (<i>shabbaton</i>)" (Leviticus 25:4) - and we have already seen (Sefer HaMitzvot, Positive Commandments 90) that this, "<i>shabbaton</i>," is a positive commandment. And He also said, "and the land shall rest" (Leviticus 25:2). And the regulations of this commandment are also already explained in Tractate Sheviit. But its obligation by Torah law is only in the Land of Israel. (See Ki Tissa; Mishneh Torah, Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee 1.)

Mitzvah 136



Mitzvah 137

That is that He commanded us to blow the shofar on the tenth day of Tishrei of this year to announce the freedom of the slaves, and that every Jewish slave go out to freedom on the tenth day of Tishrei. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "Then you shall broadcast the blowing of the shofar, etc." (Leviticus 25:9); and  then He said, "and you shall proclaim freedom" (Leviticus 25:10). And behold that it has been explained that Jubilee and Rosh Hashanah are the same regarding the blows and the blessings; and the regulations of the blowing of the shofar of Rosh Hashanah have already been explained in Tractate Rosh Hashanah. However it is known that the blowing on the Jubilee is to publicize the freeing [of the slaves] and that it is a type of proclamation. And that is His saying, "and you shall proclaim freedom in the land for all of its inhabitants" - in the mentioned land. And its content is not the same as the blowing of Rosh Hashanah. As that is for remembrance before God, and this is to bring out the slaves. (See Behar; Mishneh Torah, Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee 10.)

Mitzvah 138



Mitzvah 139

That is that He commanded us that there be [the possibility of] redeeming lands sold within the city wall only until the end of a year. And after [that] year, it remains with the buyer and does not go out in the Jubilee. And that is His, may He be exalted and may His name be blessed, saying, "And if a man sells a dwelling house in a walled city" (Leviticus 25:39). And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Arakhin. But it is only practiced in the Land [of Israel]. (See Parashat Behar; Mishneh Torah, Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee 12.)

Mitzvah 140

That is that He commanded us to count the the years and the sabbatical cycles until the Jubilee year, once the land has been conquered and we have controlled it. And this commandment - meaning the counting of the years of the sabbatical cycle is given over to the Great Court, meaning the Great Sanhedrin. For they are the ones that count each year of the fifty years, just like each and every one of us counts the days of the omer. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "And you shall count off seven weeks of years" (Leviticus 25:8). And the language of the [Sifra] (Sifra, Behar, Section 2:1) is, "I might think that one counts seven sabbatical years, one after the other, and then have the Jubilee. [Hence] we learn to say, 'seven years, seven times.' Both verses, then, are needed; if not, we would not have understood [the law.]" And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Arakhin. But it is only practiced in the Land [of Israel]. (See Parashat Behar; Mishneh Torah, Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee 12.)

Mitzvah 141



Mitzvah 142

That is that He commanded us to press the gentile and to force him to pay his debt, just as we have been commanded to pity the Jew and have been prohibited from pressing him. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "The gentile shall you press" (Deuteronomy 15:3). And the language of the Sifrei (Sifrei Devarim 113:1) is, "'The gentile shall you press' - this is a positive commandment." (See Parashat Re'eh; Mishneh Torah, Creditor and Debtor 1.)

Mitzvah 143



Mitzvah 144

That is that He commanded us to give the first shearing to the priest. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "The first shearing of your sheep [...] shall you give him" (Deuteronomy 18:4). And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Chapter 11 of Chullin. (See Parashat Shoftim; Mishneh Torah, Firstlings 10.)

Mitzvah 145

That is that He commanded us to administer the laws of dedications. And that is that when anyone dedicates something of what is his and says, "This is dedicated" - that thing is is given to a priest. However, if he clarified that it would be for Temple upeep, it will be for Temple upkeep. However, any dedication that a man will dedicate (Leviticus 27:28)

Mitzvah 146



Mitzvah 147



Mitzvah 148



Mitzvah 149



Mitzvah 150



Mitzvah 151

That is that He commanded us to check for the signs of locusts as well. And [the signs] are written in the Torah - "all [...] that have, above their feet, jointed legs" (Leviticus 11:21). And the content of this commandment is like that which we explained in the commandment before this; and the verse about it is His saying, "Of these you may eat the following - locusts" (Leviticus 11:22). And the laws of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Chullin. (See Parashat Shemini; Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Foods 1.)

Mitzvah 152

That is that He commanded us to check for the signs of [permissible] fish, which are written [in the Torah]. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "These are what you may eat from all that is in the water" (Leviticus 11:8). And in explanation, they said in the Gemara (Chullin 66b), "One who eats an impure fish transgresses a positive and a negative commandment." As its statement - "These are what you may eat" - [makes] me understand that one besides these may not be eaten. And a negative commandment that is derived from a positive commandment is a positive commandment. Behold it has been made clear that its statement, "These are what you may eat," is a positive commandment. And the content of our saying that this is a positive commandment is what we have mentioned to you; and that is our being commanded to administer these signs, and to say that this is permissible to eat and this is not permissible to eat - as it is stated (Leviticus 20:25), "And you shall distinguish the clean beast from the unclean." And their distinguishment is though the signs. And therefore each and every one of these four types and their signs is a separate commandment - meaning the signs of the beasts and the animals, the birds, the locusts and the fish. And we have already explained their expressions in each of the verses as an individual commandment. And the regulations of this commandment - meaning the signs of the fish - have already been explained in Chapter 3 of Tractate Chullin. (See Parashat Shemini; Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Foods 1.) 

Mitzvah 153



Mitzvah 154



Mitzvah 155

The 155th Positive Mitzvah is that God commanded us to sanctify the Sabbath and to make verbal declarations when it enters and goes out.  We recall at these times the Exodus from Egypt...

Mitzvah 156



Mitzvah 157



Mitzvah 158



Mitzvah 159



Mitzvah 160



Mitzvah 161



Mitzvah 162



Mitzvah 163



Mitzvah 164



Mitzvah 165

That is that He commanded us to rest from work and [certain] actions on Yom Kippur. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "It is a Shabbat of <i>Shabbaton</i> for you" (Leviticus 16:31). And we have already explained several times that this rest is a positive commandment. (See Parashat Emor; Mishneh Torah, Rest on a Holiday 1.)

Mitzvah 166



Mitzvah 167



Mitzvah 168



Mitzvah 169



Mitzvah 170

This commandment is to hear the sound of the shofar on the first day of Tishrei, as He, the prasied One said, "A day of [shofar] blasts it should be for you". The details of this Mitzvah are expounded in tractate Rosh Hashana. Women are not required to fulfill this Mitzvah.

Mitzvah 171



Mitzvah 172



Mitzvah 173

That is that He commanded us to appoint a king upon us - [that] he gather all of our nation and lead us. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "You surely may set a king over you" (Deuteronomy 17:15). And the language of the Sifrei already preceded us (Sifrei Devarim 67:1), "Three commandments were commanded to Israel upon their entrance to the land: To appoint a king over them; to build the [Temple]; and to cut off the seed of Amalek." And the [further] language of the Sifrei (Sifrei Devarim 157:6) is, "'You surely may set a king over you' [...] - that his awe be over you," and that we place in our hearts the utmost honor, glory, praise and status of the highest magnitude which has nothing above it about him, until his level for us is greater than the level of the prophet, and of the other prophets that will be in his generation. Anytime that the commandment of the king does not contradict a commandment of the Torah, we are surely obligated to listen to his commandment. And one who transgresses his commandment and does not listen to him is surely fit - and it is permissible - for the king to kill [him] as he wishes; and as Israel said about themselves (Joshua 1:18), "Any man who flouts your commands, etc." And anyone who rebels against the monarchy can have his blood avenged by a king who was established according to the Torah. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Sanhedrin and in Chapter 1 of Keritot and 7 of Sotah. (See Parashat Shoftim; Mishneh Torah, Kings and Wars 1.)

Mitzvah 174



Mitzvah 175



Mitzvah 176



Mitzvah 177



Mitzvah 178

And that is that He commanded us to testify in court about everything that we know. Whether the testimony about one will bring a death penalty or save him, or [save] his money or destroy it - we are obligated to testify about all of this and to inform the judges about that which we have seen or heard. And behold that they brought a proof about the obligation of telling over testimony from His, may He be blessed, saying, "and is a witness, whether he has seen or known of it" (Leviticus 5:1). And the punishment for one who transgresses this commandment and suppresses his testimony is great. And that it His saying, "if he do not utter it, then he shall bear his iniquity." And this is a general matter. But if the testimony he suppressed was testimony about money, and he denied it and swore falsely [about it], he is liable for a variable offering, as is explained by Scripture, according to the stipulations mentioned in Shevuot. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Sanhedrin. (See Parashat Vayikra; Mishneh Torah, Testimony 9.)

Mitzvah 179



Mitzvah 180



Mitzvah 181

That is that He commanded us to behead a calf according to its commandment when a corpse is found in the field and it is not known who killed him. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "If you find a corpse, etc." (Deuteronomy 21:1). And this is the law of the beheaded calf. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in the last chapter of Sotah. (See Parashat Shoftim; Mishneh Torah, Murderer and the Preservation of Life 8.) 

Mitzvah 182



Mitzvah 183



Mitzvah 184



Mitzvah 185



Mitzvah 186



Mitzvah 187



Mitzvah 188



Mitzvah 189



Mitzvah 190



Mitzvah 191



Mitzvah 192



Mitzvah 193



Mitzvah 194



Mitzvah 195



Mitzvah 196

That is that He commanded us to exclusively cut off the seed of Amalek - males, females, adults and children - from among the rest of the descendants of Esav. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "you shall blot out the memory of Amalek" (Deuteronomy 25:19). And we already mentioned (Sefer HaMitzvot, Positive Commandments 173), "Three commandments were commanded to Israel upon their entrance to the land: To appoint a king over them; to build the [Temple]; and to cut off the seed of Amalek." And this war is a commanded war. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in the Chapter 1 of Sotah. (See Ki Tetzei; Mishneh Torah, Kings and Wars 5.)

Mitzvah 197



Mitzvah 198



Mitzvah 199



Mitzvah 200



Mitzvah 201



Mitzvah 202



Mitzvah 203



Mitzvah 204



Mitzvah 205

The 205th mitzvah is that we are commanded to admonish a person who is performing a transgression or who is preparing to do so. One must verbally warn him and admonish him. We are not allowed to say, "I will not sin; and if someone else sins, that is between him and G‑d." This [attitude] is contrary to Torah. Rather, we are commanded not to transgress, nor to allow another Jew to transgress. If a person is preparing to transgress, each individual is commanded to admonish him and to prevent him [from transgressing], even if there has not been testimony which would be sufficient for him to be punished. The source of this commandment is G‑d's statement (exalted be He), "You must admonish your neighbour." Also included in this commandment is that we should complain to a person who has done wrong to us. We should not bear a grudge and consider him to be a sinner. Rather, we are commanded to verbally complain to him in order that nothing should remain in our heart [against him]. In the words of the Sifra, "What is the source of the law that even if you admonish someone four or five times that you should continue to admonish him? From the phrase, 'hochei'ach to'chiach.' One might think that one could admonish him to the point that his facial features change — the verse therefore continues, "And not bear sin because of him." Our Sages explained that this commandment is incumbent on every individual; even a person on a low level to someone on a higher level. Even if one is cursed or insulted he should not desist, nor stop admonishing unless he is struck physically, as explained by our Sages from the Oral Torah, "[One must reprimand] until one receives physical blows." This mitzvah has conditions and laws which are explained in various places in the Talmud.

Mitzvah 206



Mitzvah 207



Mitzvah 208



Mitzvah 209



Mitzvah 210



Mitzvah 211



Mitzvah 212



Mitzvah 213



Mitzvah 214



Mitzvah 215



Mitzvah 216



Mitzvah 217



Mitzvah 218



Mitzvah 219



Mitzvah 220



Mitzvah 221



Mitzvah 222



Mitzvah 223



Mitzvah 224



Mitzvah 225



Mitzvah 226



Mitzvah 227



Mitzvah 228



Mitzvah 229



Mitzvah 230



Mitzvah 231



Mitzvah 232

That is that He commanded about the law of a Hebrew (Jewish) slave. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "When you acquire a Hebrew slave" (Exodus 21:2). And [while] most of the laws of this commandment have already been explained explicitly in the Torah, all of the laws of this commandment are explained in Tractate Kiddushin. (See Parashat Mishpatim; Mishneh Torah, Slaves 1.)

Mitzvah 233



Mitzvah 234

That is that He commanded us to redeem the Hebrew maidservant. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "he must let her be redeemed" (Exodus 21:8). This redemption has many analyses and conditions and there are many regulations for it - and they have been explained in Tractate Kiddushin. And the law of the Hebrew maidservant is completely explained there. And in the Mekhilta (Mekhilta d'Rabbi Yishmael 21:11:1) they said in explanation of, "And if these three he does not do to her" (Exodus 21:11), "Designate (marry) [her] yourself, to your son, or redeem her." (See Parashat Mishpatim; Mishneh Torah, Slaves 14.)

Mitzvah 235



Mitzvah 236



Mitzvah 237



Mitzvah 238



Mitzvah 239



Mitzvah 240



Mitzvah 241



Mitzvah 242



Mitzvah 243

That is that He commanded us about the law of the [paid guardian] and the renter - since the law of the two of them is the same, as they explained and said (Shevuot 49b), "There are three laws for four [categories of] guardians." And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "When a man gives to his fellow, etc." (Exodus 22:9). And all the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Chapter 6 and 8 of [Bava] Kamma, 8 of [Bava] Metzia and 8 of Shevuot. (See Parashat Mishpatim; Mishneh Torah, Borrowing and Deposit 1-5.)

Mitzvah 244



Mitzvah 245

That is that He commanded us about the law of buying add selling - meaning the ways in which the sale between the seller and buyer is upheld. And they already brought as a proof about these ways, His saying, "When you surely sell to your kinsman, or buy from the hand, etc. (Leviticus 25:14). And they already said (Bava Metzia 47b), "Something that is acquired from one hand to another - meaning to say, [by] pulling [it]." And there, it is already explained that from the Torah, money effectuates and acquisition, whereas the pulling of movable objects is an ordinance of the Sages, and likewise giving over and raising up. 

Mitzvah 246

That is that He commanded us about the law of claimant and defendant. And that is His, may He be exalted and may His name be blessed, saying, "For all manner of trespass [...] of which one can say, 'This is it'" (Deuteronomy 21:22). And the language of the Mekhilta is, "'This is it' - until he makes a partial admission." And in this law is included all the claims that transpire between people - some against others - that involve admission and denial. And the laws of this commandment have already been explained in [Chapter] 3 of [Bava] Kamma and 5 and 6 of Shevuot; and there are also many questions about it scattered  in many places in the Talmud and in Chapter 1 and 8 of [Bava] Metzia. (See Mishpatim; Mishneh Torah, Plaintiff and Defendant 1- 16.)

Conclusion for Positive Commandments

And you should know that, that which we said, [that] their regulations are in place x - our intentions was not that in that chapter or that tractate would be included all of the regulations of that commandment, to the point that no question would remain. Rather I am mentioning  the place in which there is the main law of the commandment and most of its regulations. However there will be many questions to the regulations of that commandment that are scattered in many places in the Talmud, but I will not mention their places now. And when you now examine all of these commandments that are previously mentioned, you will find among them commandments that are an obligation on the community - not on each and every individual - like the building of the choice [Temple], the establishment of a king and the cutting off of the seed of Amalek. And there are [also] among them, commandments that are obligatory on an individual if he did a certain act or something happens to him. 

Negative Commandments



Mitzvah 1



Mitzvah 2



Mitzvah 3



Mitzvah 4



Mitzvah 5

That is that we have been prohibited from bowing to an idol. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "You shall have not bow to them" (Exodus 20:5). And it is clear that by our saying, idol, we mean anything worshipped besides God. And the intention is not only bowing and nothing else. Indeed, He mentioned one of the ways of worship - meaning to say, bowing - but we are also prohibited from sacrificing to them, to offer libations and to burn incense [to them]. And one who has transgressed one of these and bowed, sacrificed, offered libation or burned incense is liable for stoning. And the language of the Mekhilta (Mekhilta d'Rabbi Yishmael 22:19) is, "'Whoever sacrifices to gods shall be proscribed' - we have [thus] heard the punishment. From where [do we know] the prohibition? [Hence] we learn to say, 'You shall not bow to them and you shall not worship them.' Sacrifice was included (in serving), and it was singled out to teach [that] just as sacrificing is distinctive in that we serve the Heavens in a similar way and one is liable for it, whether he worships it or he does not not worship it - so too, one is liable for all the ways that are similar to how we serve the Heavens, whether he worships it or he does not not worship it." And it has already been explained in the Gemara, Makkot (Makkot 23b) that this negative commandment is included in the 613 commandments. And that is their saying, "There were 613 commandments stated to Moshe at Sinai, etc." - as we explained about the first positive commandment (Sefer HaMitzvot, Positive Commandments 1). (See Parashat Yitro; Mishneh Torah, Foundations of the Torah 1.)

Mitzvah 6



Mitzvah 7



Mitzvah 8



Mitzvah 9



Mitzvah 10



Mitzvah 11



Mitzvah 12



Mitzvah 13



Mitzvah 14

That we have been prohibited from swearing by an idol. And we may not even have its worshippers swear by it, as they explained with their saying, "You shall not have a idolater swear by his deity." And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "and make no mention of the name of other gods" (Exodus 23:13) - do not make an idolater swear by his deity. And in Sanhedrin (Sanhedrin 63b) [it says], "'Make no mention' - that a man should not say to his fellow, 'Wait for me next to idol x.'" And one who transgressed this negative commandment - meaning that he swears by one of the creations, that are thought of as gods by the those in error, in the manner of exaltation - is liable for lashes. And in the Gemara, Sanhedrin (Sanhedrin 63a), it said that with that which we have been prohibited to hug an idol, to kiss it, to sweep in front of it and similar actions of honor and love - one is not lashed for any of them, except for the one who vows by its name and the one who affirms by its name. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in the seventh [chapter] of Sanhedrin. (See Parashat Mishpatim; Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations 4.)

Mitzvah 15



Mitzvah 16

That we have been prohibited from inciting. And that is that one preach to an individual Jew to worship an idol. And this is called an enticer (<i>mesit</i>), as was previously explained. And the language of the prohibition of this is, "and they will not continue to do like this evil thing" (Deuteronomy 13:12). And one who transgressed this negative commandment is liable for stoning, as appears in the verse, "But rather surely kill him" (Deuteronomy 13:10). And the person that the inciter is trying to incite is the appropriate [one] to kill him - as He, may He be exalted, explains, "let your hand be the first against him." And the language of the Sifrei is, "This commandment is with the hand of the incited." And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Sanhedrin. (See Parashat Re'eh; Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations 5.)

Mitzvah 17

That an incited one has been prohibited from loving the inciter and from listening to his words. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "Do not esteem him" (Deuteronomy 13:9). And the language of the Sifrei (Sifrei Devarim 89:1) is, "It is implied from its being stated, 'you shall love your neighbor like yourself' (Leviticus 19:18) [that] perhaps you should love this one. [Hence] we learn to say, 'Do not esteem him.'" (See Parashat Re'eh; Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations 5.)

Mitzvah 18



Mitzvah 19



Mitzvah 20



Mitzvah 21



Mitzvah 22



Mitzvah 23



Mitzvah 24



Mitzvah 25



Mitzvah 26



Mitzvah 27



Mitzvah 28



Mitzvah 29



Mitzvah 30



Mitzvah 31



Mitzvah 32



Mitzvah 33



Mitzvah 34



Mitzvah 35



Mitzvah 36



Mitzvah 37



Mitzvah 38



Mitzvah 39



Mitzvah 40



Mitzvah 41



Mitzvah 42



Mitzvah 43



Mitzvah 44



Mitzvah 45

We have been prohibited from making a gash "for a life" in our flesh like the idolaters did. This is as it is said "Lo Titgodedu." This commandment has already been duplicated when it says "a gash for a life you shall not make..." (Leviticus 19:28) ... And there it explains that one who gashes in response to a death, whether by hand or with a utensil, is liable; [one who gashes] for idolatry, with a utensil is liable but by hand is exempt [from punishment], as comes from the explanation in the Navi, "And they gashed themselves like their manner with swords." (Melachim I 18:28). Behold, they said that in the category of this [law] is the prohibition against splitting the opinions of the town in their customs. They said, "Lo Tigodedu means don't make agudot (groups)" (Sifrei Devarim 96:10), but the main meaning of the text is like we explained, don't make a gash for the dead. This is like an interpretation of the text. So too, said [the Talmud in Sanhedrin 110], "one who holds on to a legal dispute violates a negative commandment, like it says, "do not be like Korach and his congregation," which is also like an interpretation of the text indeed the body of the text is meant to scare. And according to what the Sages ...

Mitzvah 46

That we have been prohibited from dwelling in the Land of Egypt forever, so that we not learn from their practices and not follow their disgraceful ways. And that is His saying, "You must not return that way again" (Deuteronomy 17:16). And this prohibition was already repeated three times: They said in the Gemara (Yerushalmi Sukkah 4:1 ), "In three places did the Holy One, blessed be He, warn Israel not to return to Egypt; and at three times did they return and get punished from them." Indeed one of the three places is that which we mentioned. The second is, "by a route which I told you, you should not see again" (Deuteronomy 28:68). And the third is, "for Egypt which you have seen this day - you will never again see them" (Exodus 14:13). Even though it appears from the words that it is narrative, the tradition comes [to teach that] it is a prohibition. And it has already been explained in the Gemara, Sukkah (Sukkah 51b), that Alexandria is from the cities in which it is forbidden to dwell. And [from the Sea of] Alexandria, the measurement of the perimeter of Egypt is four hundred parasangs by four hundred parasangs - and that is the total of the Land of Egypt in which it is forbidden to dwell. But it is permissible to travel in it for business, or to pass through to a different land. And in explanation, they said in the Yerushalmi (Yerushalmi Sanhedrin, Chapter 10 at the end), "You may not return for living, but you may return for business and to conquer the land." (See Parashat Shoftim; Mishneh Torah, Kings and Wars 5.)

Mitzvah 47



Mitzvah 48

That we have been prohibited from making a covenant with the heretics - meaning, with the seven nations (of Canaan). And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "and you shall not make a covenant with them" (Deuteronomy 7:2). And we have already explained in Positive Commandment 187 that war with the seven nations and everything that comes with them is appropriate to list [as commandments], and that it does not go in the way of commandments that are not practiced for [all] generations. (See Parashat Vaetchanan; Mishneh Torah, Foreign Worship and Customs of the Nations 10.)

Mitzvah 49



Mitzvah 50



Mitzvah 51



Mitzvah 52



Mitzvah 53



Mitzvah 54



Mitzvah 55



Mitzvah 56



Mitzvah 57



Mitzvah 58



Mitzvah 59



Mitzvah 60



Mitzvah 61



Mitzvah 62



Mitzvah 63



Mitzvah 64

That He prohibited us - not to test [His] assurances and threats of which His prophets have assured us - in the way of a doubt that we doubt them - once we have ascertained the truth of the prophet that is saying them. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "You shalt not test the Lord, your God" (Deuteronomy 6:16). (See Parashat Vaetchanan; Mishneh Torah, Foundations of the Torah at the end.)

Mitzvah 65



Mitzvah 66



Mitzvah 67

That He prohibited us from being lethargic in guarding the Temple and constantly walking around it the whole night. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "And you shall keep the charge of the sanctuary" (Deuteronomy 18:5). And it has already been explained in Commandment 22 of the Positive Commandments that guarding the Temple and walking around it is a positive commandment; and we are now likewise explaining that its negation is a negative commandment. And the language of the Mekhilta is, "'And they shall keep the charge of the Tent of Meeting' (Deuteronomy 18:4) - I only have a positive commandment. From where [do we know] that it is [also] a negative commandment? [Hence] we learn to say, 'And you shall keep the charge of the sanctuary.'" And the regulations of this law have already been explained at the beginning of Tamid and Middot. (See Parashat Korach; Mishneh Torah, The Chosen Temple 8.)

Mitzvah 68



Mitzvah 69



Mitzvah 70



Mitzvah 71



Mitzvah 72



Mitzvah 73



Mitzvah 74



Mitzvah 75



Mitzvah 76



Mitzvah 77

That He prohibited any impure person from entering the Sanctuary (the Tabernacle) - and everything that is similar to it for [all] the generations: All of the courtyard and from the Gate of Nikanor onwards, which is the courtyard of the Israelites. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "so that they shall not render their camp impure" (Numbers 5:3). And in the Gemara, Makkot (Makkot 14b), they said, "One who entered the Temple [while] impure - a punishment is written and a prohibition is written: The punishment - 'he has rendered impure the Tabernacle of the Lord, and that soul shall be excised' (Numbers 19:13). The prohibition - 'so that they shall not render their camp impure.'" And in the Mekhilta: "'Command the Children of Israel to send away from the camp' - is with a positive commandment. But from where [do we know] it is [also] with a negative commandment? You can say, 'so that they shall not render their camp impure.'" And the prohibition about this content has already been repeated with different language; and that His, may He be exalted, saying  about a woman who has given birth, "and she shall not come into the sanctuary" (Leviticus 12:4). And in the [Sifra] (Sifra, Tazria Parashat Yoledet, Section 1:1), they said, "Because it is stated (Leviticus 15:31), 'And you shall separate the Children of Israel,' I would understand, whether from its front or from its back, and one is impure, he is liable. [Hence] we learn to say, 'and she shall not come into the sanctuary.'"And there it is explained that the law of a woman who has given birth and the law of other impure people is the same with regards to this. And they [also] said in the [Sifra] (Sifra, Acharei Mot, Chapter 12:13-14), about His saying "But if he does not wash and does not bathe his body" (Leviticus 17:16), "How is this? For [failure in] the bathing of his body, the punishment is excision, but for [failure in] the washing of his clothes, it is with forty [lashes]. And from where [do we know] that it is speaking here of his rendering the sanctuary and its consecrated objects impure? It prohibited and punished, etc." Behold it has been made clear that one who transgresses this negative commandment - if he was intentional, he is punished with excision; and if he was inadvertent, he must bring a variable offering, as we explained in Commandment 72 of the Positive Commandments. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained at the beginning of Shevuot and in Horayot. (See Parashat Nasso; Mishneh Torah, Admission into the Sanctuary 3.)

Mitzvah 78



Mitzvah 79



Mitzvah 80



Mitzvah 81

That He prohibited us from extinguishing fire on top of the altar. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "A perpetual fire shall be kept burning on the altar, not to go out" (Leviticus 6:6). And in the [Sifra] (Sifra, Tzav, Chapter 10:7): "One who extinguishes [it] transgresses a negative commandment." And anyone who transgresses this negative commandment and extinguishes even one of the coals of the altar is lashed. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in the tenth [chapter] of Zevachim. (See Parashat Tzav; Mishneh Torah, Daily Offerings and Additional Offerings 2.)

Mitzvah 82



Mitzvah 83



Mitzvah 84



Mitzvah 85



Mitzvah 86

He prohibited us from removing the poles of the ark from the rings. And that is His saying, "The poles shall be in the rings of the ark; they shall not be taken from it." (Exodus 25:15). And at the end of Makkot (Makkot 22a), they said when they mentioned those liable for lashes, "But behold, there is [also] the one who removes the poles of the ark!" [This] means to say that he is lashed. And its prohibition is from here - "they shall not be taken from it." Behold it is been made clear to you that it is a negative commandment and that we give lashes for it. (See Parashat Vayakhel; Mishneh Torah, Vessels of the Sanctuary and Those who Serve Therein 2.)

Mitzvah 87

He prohibited us from removing the breastplate from the <i>ephod</i> (a type of apron worn by the high priest), but rather that the breastplate be attached to it. And at the end of Makkot (Makkot 22a), they said when they mentioned those liable for lashes, "But behold, there is [also] the one who loosens the breastplate!" Behold it is already been made clear that one who loosens [it] is lashed. (See Parashat Vayakhel; Mishneh Torah, Vessels of the Sanctuary and Those who Serve Therein 9.)

Mitzvah 88



Mitzvah 89



Mitzvah 90



Mitzvah 91

He prohibited us from consecrating animals with blemishes on the altar. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "You shall not offer anything that has a blemish" (Leviticus 22:20). And they said (Sifra, Emor, Section 7:4), "Behold, he transgresses on account of, 'do not consecrate.'" (See Parashat Emor; Mishneh Torah, Things Forbidden on the Altar 1.)

Mitzvah 92



Mitzvah 93



Mitzvah 94



Mitzvah 95



Mitzvah 96



Mitzvah 97

He prohibited us from putting a blemish into consecrated animals. And that is called, placing a blemish into consecrated animals. And any one  who places a blemish into consecrated animals is lashed - and this is on condition that it is at the time that the Temple exists - that it be fit as a sacrifice.  And the prohibition about this came - "no blemish shall be on it." (Leviticus 22:21). And the language of the Sifra (Sifra, Emor, Section 7:9) is, "'No blemish shall be on it' - do not put a blemish in it." (See Parashat Emor; Mishneh Torah, Things Forbidden on the Altar 1.)

Mitzvah 98



Mitzvah 99



Mitzvah 100



Mitzvah 101



Mitzvah 102



Mitzvah 103



Mitzvah 104



Mitzvah 105



Mitzvah 106

He prohibited us from substituting consecrated animals. And that is His saying, "One may not exchange nor substitute for it" (Leviticus 27:10). And the prohibition already appeared specifically about the [animal] tithe. And the reason is that which they mentioned in the [Sifra] (Sifra, Bechukotai, Chapter 9:4): And that is their saying, "The tithe was in the category [of all consecrated animals]. Why, then, was it singled out? To make a comparison to it: Just as the tithe is consecrated animals that go on the altar and its substitution is not permitted; so too, is the substitution of all consecrated animals that go on the altar not permitted." And that is His saying, "nor substitute for it," and His saying, "One may not exchange" - however that is only with consecrated animals that go on the altar. And one who substitutes [it] is lashed. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Temurah. (See Parashat Bechukotai; Mishneh Torah, Substitution 1.)

Mitzvah 107



Mitzvah 108



Mitzvah 109



Mitzvah 110



Mitzvah 111



Mitzvah 112



Mitzvah 113



Mitzvah 114



Mitzvah 115



Mitzvah 116



Mitzvah 117



Mitzvah 118



Mitzvah 119



Mitzvah 120



Mitzvah 121



Mitzvah 122



Mitzvah 123



Mitzvah 124



Mitzvah 125



Mitzvah 126



Mitzvah 127



Mitzvah 128



Mitzvah 129



Mitzvah 130



Mitzvah 131



Mitzvah 132



Mitzvah 133



Mitzvah 134

That He prohibited a tenant of a priest, or his hired servant from eating the priestly tithe. And that is His saying, "a tenant of a priest, or a hired servant, shall not eat of the consecrated food" (Leviticus 22:10). But if he ate [it], his law is like the law of other outsiders. (See Parashat Emor; Mishneh Torah, Heave Offerings 6.)

Mitzvah 135



Mitzvah 136



Mitzvah 137



Mitzvah 138



Mitzvah 139



Mitzvah 140



Mitzvah 141



Mitzvah 142



Mitzvah 143



Mitzvah 144



Mitzvah 145



Mitzvah 146



Mitzvah 147



Mitzvah 148



Mitzvah 149

That He prohibited the priests from eating firstfruits outside [of Jerusalem]. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "You may not, etc. and the tithe of your hand" (Deuteronomy 12:17) - that is the firstfruits. For He did not leave anything that requires being brought to a place in this verse that was not mentioned in the explanation. And among them, He mentioned, "and the tithe (<i>terumah</i>) of your hand" (Deuteronomy 12:17) - without a doubt, that is the firstfruits. Indeed, it is known that the priestly tithe (<i>terumah</i>) does not require bringing to a place - how would one be careful from eating it "in your cities?" And the language of the Sifrei (Sifrei Devarim 72:9) is, "The verse only came about one who eats firstfruits who has not recited the declaration over them, that he transgresses a negative commandment." And it has already been explained at the end of Makkot (Makkot 19a) that we we are only liable for them before he has placed them in the [Temple] courtyard. But once he has placed them in the courtyard, one is exempt for them, even though he has not recited [the declaration]. And the condition that there is with the second tithe also exists with firstfruits - meaning to say, that one is not liable for them when he eats them outside until they see the presence of the Temple. But when someone ate them outside after they saw the presence of the Temple before they are placed in the courtyard, he is lashed only if he is a priest. However an Israelite who eats firstfruits - even after the declaration - is liable for death at the hands of the Heavens. And in the second [chapter] of Bikkurim, (Bikkurim 2:1), [they] said, "For the priestly tithe and for firstfruits, one is liable for death, and a fifth; and they are forbidden to outsiders." So if an outsider eats them: If he was volitional, he is liable for death; and if inadvertent, he adds a fifth - exactly like the law of the priestly tithe. For since Scripture called them, "the tithe of your hand," it becomes liable to the laws of the priestly tithe. And it is appropriate for you to understand this properly until you will not get it confused: And that is that the when the priests eats firstfruits from when they have seen the presence of the Temple before they they have been placed in the courtyard, he is lashed; and its prohibition is from here - "You may not eat in your cities, etc. and the tithe of your hand," as is explained in Makkot (Makkot 17). [This is] like an Israelite concerning the second tithe, about which one is lashed for eating it outside of its place, even though it is his. Nevertheless, when an Israelite eats firstfruits after they have seen the presence of the Temple, he is liable for death anytime he eats them. And its prohibition is from, "And no outsider shall eat of the consecrated food (<i>kodesh</i>)" (Leviticus 22:10), as we explained in Commandment 133 of these (negative) commandments. (See Parashat Re'eh; Mishneh Torah, First Fruits and other Gifts to Priests Outside the Sanctuary 3.)

Mitzvah 150



Mitzvah 151

That He prohibited us from eating second tithe when grieving - even in Jerusalem - until it has been redeemed. And that is His saying, "I did not eat of it when grieving" (Deuteronomy 26:14). And the language of the Mishnah in Bikkurim (Bikkurim 2:2) is that "The [second] tithe and firstfruits require being brought to [the appointed] place; they require confession; and they are forbidden to one grieving." And likewise anyone grieving is forbidden with regards to all consecrated foods from this verse, as well as from it being written in the Torah, "and such things have befallen me" (Leviticus 10:19). And the regulations of this commandment - meaning to say, grieving - have already been explained in the eighth [chapter] of Pesachim and the second [chapter] of Zevachim. And one who eats second tithe or tithes while grieving is lashed. (See Parashat Ki Tavo; Mishneh Torah, Second Tithes and Fourth Year's Fruit 3.)

Mitzvah 152



Mitzvah 153



Mitzvah 154



Mitzvah 155



Mitzvah 156



Mitzvah 157



Mitzvah 158



Mitzvah 159



Mitzvah 160



Mitzvah 161



Mitzvah 162



Mitzvah 163



Mitzvah 164



Mitzvah 165



Mitzvah 166



Mitzvah 167



Mitzvah 168



Mitzvah 169



Mitzvah 170



Mitzvah 171



Mitzvah 172



Mitzvah 173



Mitzvah 174



Mitzvah 175



Mitzvah 176



Mitzvah 177



Mitzvah 178



Mitzvah 179



Mitzvah 180



Mitzvah 181



Mitzvah 182



Mitzvah 183



Mitzvah 184



Mitzvah 185



Mitzvah 186



Mitzvah 187



Mitzvah 188



Mitzvah 189



Mitzvah 190



Mitzvah 191



Mitzvah 192



Mitzvah 193



Mitzvah 194



Mitzvah 195

He prohibited us from being gluttonous and drunk with food and drink in the days of youth and under the conditions of the law of the stubborn and rebellious [son]. And that is His saying, "'You shall not eat with the blood" (Leviticus 19:26). And the explanation of this is that a stubborn and rebellious son is included in [those things] that are liable for a death penalty of the court; and the language of the Torah about it (Deuteronomy 21:21) is that it is [punished] with stoning. And it has already been explained at the introduction of this essay (Sefer HaMitzvot Shoreshim 14) that anything for which one is liable for excision or a death penalty of the court is a negative commandment, except for the Pesach-sacrifice and circumcision - as we explained. If so, since the gluttonous and drunk son under the specified conditions is sentenced to stoning, we know that the act is perforce prohibited to him - since the punishment was explicit. Hence we must search for the prohibition, since Scripture did not punish [for something] unless it prohibited [it]. And the language of the Gemara, Sanhedrin (Sanhedrin 63a), is, "From where [do we know] the prohibition of a stubborn and rebellious son? [Hence] we learn to say, 'You shall not eat with the blood'" - meaning to say, do not eat an eating that brings about the spilling of blood; and that is the eating of  a stubborn and rebellious son, as he is liable for death because of it. And when he eats this bad eating in those not good ways, he has already transgressed the negative commandment - even thought this is a general negative commandment, as we explained in the ninth principle. For this is not difficult: Since the punishment is explicit, we do not concern ourselves whether the prohibition is bona fide or whether it is from a general negative commandment. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Chapter 8 of Sanhedrin. (See Parashat Kedoshim; Mishneh Torah, Rebels 7.)

Mitzvah 196



Mitzvah 197



Mitzvah 198



Mitzvah 199



Mitzvah 200

He prohibited us - that chametz not be seen within all of our boundaries for seven days (starting on the fifteenth of Nissan). And that is His saying, "no chametz may be seen in your possession, and no leaven may be seen in all your boundaries" (Exodus 13:7). And these are not two negative commandments, but they are rather about the same content. And in the explanation (Beitzah 7b), they said, "The verse opened with chametz and ended with leaven, to tell you that chametz and leaven is the same thing" - meaning there is no difference between chametz and leaven. And one who transgressed and left chametz in his property is only liable for lashes if he acquired the chametz on Pesach, since he did an action. And the language of the Tosefta (Tosefta Makkot 4:5) is, "One who leaves over chametz on Pesach, and one who allows a forbidden mixture of the vineyard, is not lashed." (See Parashat Bo; Mishneh Torah, Leavened and Unleavened Bread 1.)

Mitzvah 201



Mitzvah 202



Mitzvah 203

He prohibited the nazirite from eating grapes; and if he ate a <i>kazayit</i> of grapes, he is lashed. And that is His saying, "nor shall he eat grapes fresh or dried" (Numbers 6:3). (See Parashat Nasso; Mishneh Torah, Nazariteship 1.)

Mitzvah 204



Mitzvah 205



Mitzvah 206



Mitzvah 207



Mitzvah 208



Mitzvah 209



Mitzvah 210



Mitzvah 211



Mitzvah 212



Mitzvah 213

He prohibited - not to gather the single grapes that fall in the vineyard at the time of the harvest, but one must rather leave them for the poor. And that is His saying, "neither shall you gather the single grapes of your vineyard, etc." (Leviticus 19:10).  And this too is rectified by a positive commandment; and the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Peah. (See Parashat Kedoshim; Mishneh Torah, Gifts to the Poor 1.)

Mitzvah 214

He prohibited us from taking the forgotten sheaves. And that is His saying, "and you forget a sheaf in the field, you may not return to take it" (Deuteronomy 24:19). And [the commandment of leaving what is forgotten] is practiced both with produce and with [fruit] trees; and is rectified by a positive commandment. For if one transgressed and took it, he is obligated to return it to the poor. And that is His saying, "it shall be for the stranger, the orphan and the widow." And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Tractate Peah. And know that the principle with us is that any negative commandment that has a positive commandment [attached to it] - if he fulfills the positive commandment in it, he is not lashed; and if he does not fulfill it, he is lashed. And example of this is that if he harvested the corner, he is not liable for lashes immediately when he harvested. Ratherer he must return the sheaves. And likewise if he threshed them, ground the wheat and kneaded the dough, he must give what was fit for him for [his obligation of] the corner, from the dough. But if it happened that that the wheat got totally lost or it was burnt, he is lashed - as he did not fulfill the positive commandment in it. And all the more so if he negated [the positive commandment] actively - as when he ate all of the wheat.  (See Parashat Ki Tetzei; Mishneh Torah, Gifts to the Poor 1.)

Mitzvah 215



Mitzvah 216



Mitzvah 217



Mitzvah 218



Mitzvah 219



Mitzvah 220



Mitzvah 221



Mitzvah 222



Mitzvah 223



Mitzvah 224



Mitzvah 225



Mitzvah 226



Mitzvah 227



Mitzvah 228

He prohibited us from changing the open places of the Levites. And that is His saying, "And the field of the open place of their cities, etc." (Leviticus 25:34). And you know the language of the Torah, that cities and open places be given to the Levites - meaning to say, a thousand ells [as an] open place and two thousand ells going out from there for fields and vineyards, as it has been explained in Sotah (Sotah 27b). And the prohibition comes to the Levites not to change these distinctions - that they not make the city, an open place; the open place, a city; the field, an open place; or the open place, a field. And that is His saying, "shall not be sold" - and the tradition comes [to explain that this indicates] that its nature not be changed. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in Eruvin. (See Parashat Behar; Mishneh Torah, Sabbatical Year and the Jubilee 13.)

Mitzvah 229



Mitzvah 230



Mitzvah 231



Mitzvah 232



Mitzvah 233

He prohibited the sending away of a Hebrew (Jewish) slave empty-handed when he goes out to freedom at the end of six years, but we must rather requite him with something from our wealth under all circumstances. And that is His saying, "And when you send him free from you, do not send him empty-handed" (Deuteronomy 15:13). And the regulations of requiting have already been explained in Chapter 1 of Kiddushin. (See Parashat Re'eh; Mishneh Torah, Slaves 3.) 

Mitzvah 234

He prohibited that the lender seek out the borrower, when he knows that he is not able to pay. And that is His saying, "do not be to him as a creditor" (Exodus 22:24). And in the Gemara, Metzia (Bava Metzia 75b): "From where [do we know] about one who is owed one hundred dinars by his fellow and knows that [the latter] does not have [the funds] - that it is forbidden for him to pass in front of him? As it is stated, 'Do not be to him as a creditor' (Exodus 22:24)." And in the Mekhilta (Mekhilta d'Rabbi Yishmael 22:24:4): "'Do not be to him as a creditor' - do not appear to him at all times." And know that this prohibition also includes one who seeks out a debt of interest. And so did they say (Mishnah Bava Metzia 5:11) - that one who lends with interest transgresses, "do not be to him as a creditor," as I will explain in what follows this. (See Parashat Mishpatim; Mishneh Torah, Creditor and Debtor 4.) 

Mitzvah 235



Mitzvah 236



Mitzvah 237

He prohibited being involved with a loan with interest between a borrow and a lender - not to be a guarantor for one of them, not to be a witness for them and not write a contract about what they agreed upon about the interest. And that is His saying, "you shall not lay upon him interest" (Exodus 22:24). And the language of the Gemara, Metzia (Bava Metzia 75b), is "The guarantor and the witnesses only transgress on account of, 'you shall not lay.'" And there, it is explained that the scribe, the witnesses and the guarantor also transgress. And there, it is also explained that this negative statement, which is 'you shall not lay' - even with its coming about the middlemen, meaning those [tangentially] involved in that matter - also includes the lender. And therefore the lender transgresses six negative statements -   The borrower transgresses on account of, 'You shall not charge interest; and on account of 'you shall not put a stumbling block in front of the blind'" - as we will explain, when we mention this commandment (Sefer HaMitzvot, Negative Commandments 299).  (See Mishpatim; Mishneh Torah, Creditor and Debtor 4.)

Mitzvah 238



Mitzvah 239

He prohibited us from taking collateral from borrowers into our hands except by the order of the judge and through his messenger; and that we not come, ourselves, into the debtor's house and take it as collateral. And that is His saying, "you must not enter his house to seize his pledge" (Deuteronomy 24:10). And the language of the Mishnah (Bava Metzia 113a) is, "One who lends money to another may take collateral only by means of the court. And he may not enter his house to take his collateral, as it is stated, 'You shall stand outside' (Deuteronomy 24:11)." And it is a negative commandment that is rectified by a positive commandment. And that is His saying, "You must surely return the pledge to him" (Deuteronomy 24:13). And so is it explained at the end of Tractate Makkot (Makkot 16a). And know that if he does not return it and does not fulfill the positive commandment in it, he is liable for lashes, and pays the money of the collateral - as it is explained at the end of Makkot. And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained in the ninth [chapter] of [Bava] Metzia. (See Parashat Ki Teitzeh; Mishneh Torah, Creditor and Debtor 3.)

Mitzvah 240



Mitzvah 241



Mitzvah 242



Mitzvah 243



Mitzvah 244



Mitzvah 245



Mitzvah 246



Mitzvah 247



Mitzvah 248



Mitzvah 249



Mitzvah 250



Mitzvah 251



Mitzvah 252



Mitzvah 253



Mitzvah 254



Mitzvah 255



Mitzvah 256



Mitzvah 257



Mitzvah 258



Mitzvah 259



Mitzvah 260



Mitzvah 261



Mitzvah 262

He prohibited afflicting a Hebrew (Jewish) maidservant if one acquires her and marries her. [This] means to say, that we not reduce her food, her clothing or her time, by way of affliction and hurt. And that is His saying, "he shall not diminish her <i>she'er</i> (food), her clothing and her time" (Exodus 21:10). And this prohibition includes anyone who marries an Israelite woman - that he should not afflict her with any of these things, by way of hurt and distress. And that is His saying about a Hebrew maidservant - about whom He prohibited preventing her from her food, her clothing and her time - "according to the ordinance of the daughters shall he do to her" (Exodus 21:10). Behold, He informed us that the ordinance of the daughters is that he not prevent food, clothing and time from them. And they said in the Mekhilta (Mekhilta d'Rabbi Yishmael 21:9:2), "Now what do we learn from 'the ordinance of the daughters?' It comes to teach [about a maidservant], but it ends up learning [about daughters in general]." And there (Mekhilta d'Rabbi Yishmael 21:10:2), they said, "'Her <i>she'er</i>' is food; 'her clothing,' is as it is understood; and 'her time,' is the way of the world (conjugal rights)." (See Parashat Mishpatim; Mishneh Torah, Marriage 14.)

Mitzvah 263



Mitzvah 264



Mitzvah 265

He prohibited us from putting our thoughts to fabricating machinations in order to acquire that which is in the possession of any of our brothers besides us (fellow Jews). And that is His saying, "You shall not covet your neighbor’s house" (Exodus 20:14). And the language of the Mekhilta (Mekhilta d'Rabbi Yishmael 20:14:3) is, "'You shall not covet' - perhaps even if one covets with speech? [Hence] we learn to say, 'You shall not covet the silver and gold' (Deuteronomy 7:25). Just as there, [he is not liable] until he performs an act, so [too] here [is he not liable] until he performs an act." Behold it has been made clear to you that this negative commandment prohibits us from tricks that [enable] us to take our brothers' property that we have been coveting for ourselves - even when we buy it and give him money. Whoever does any of this is surely transgressing, "You shall not covet." (See Parashat Yitro; Mishneh Torah, Robbery 1.)

Mitzvah 266



Mitzvah 267

He prohibited the worker from eating from something that he is working on, during the time of his work (see Mishneh Torah, Laws of Hiring 12:3 and Hagahot Maimoniyot there), when it is attached to the ground. And that is His saying, "but do not lift a sickle over your fellow’s standing grainstalks" (Deuteronomy 23:26). They said, "'But a sickle,' is to include anyone with a sickle, at the time of the sickling." Meaning, at the time of the harvest, do not harvest for yourself. And it is already known that this verse is speaking about a worker. So when it says, "When you enter," it means to say with it, "When you, the worker, entered" - like the Targum (Onkelos Deuteronomy 23:26) said, "when you are hired." And likewise in Metzia (Bava Metzia 87a), they said, "These eat according to the Torah - one involved with the attached [produce] at the time of the work's end." And the regulations of this commandment have already been explained there. (See Ki Tetzei; Mishneh Torah, Hiring 12.)

Mitzvah 268



Mitzvah 269



Mitzvah 270



Mitzvah 271



Mitzvah 272



Mitzvah 273

That He prohibited us from doing inequity in judgement. That is His, may He be exalted, saying, "You shall not commit injustice in judgement" (Leviticus 19:15). And the content of this negative commandment is that one not go against the rules that the Torah established to make liable for something or to be exempt from it. (See Kedoshim; Mishneh Torah,  The Sanhedrin and the Penalties within their Jurisdiction 20.)

Mitzvah 274



Mitzvah 275



Mitzvah 276



Mitzvah 277



Mitzvah 278



Mitzvah 279



Mitzvah 280



Mitzvah 281



Mitzvah 282



Mitzvah 283



Mitzvah 284



Mitzvah 285



Mitzvah 286



Mitzvah 287



Mitzvah 288



Mitzvah 289



Mitzvah 290



Mitzvah 291



Mitzvah 292



Mitzvah 293



Mitzvah 294



Mitzvah 295



Mitzvah 296



Mitzvah 297



Mitzvah 298



Mitzvah 299

It prohibits some of us from making others stumble. And that is if a person asks you for advice about something, you fool him. And this prohibition comes to prevent deceiving him and making him stumble. Rather you should set him straight about a matter that you think is [actually] good and straight. And this is [the meaning] of its stating, "you shall not place a stumbling block before the blind." And the language of [Sifra] is, "to the one who is blind about a certain matter and who [hence] takes advice from you, do not give advice that is not proper." And this negative commandment also includes one who helps another [do] a sin or enables it. For he brought that person to iniquity and made him stumble with his assistance; such that the blindness came back to seduce [the sinner], and he helped him complete his sin or arranged to enable the sin. And from such angles, [the Sages] said about the lender and borrower with interest that both of them transgress, "you shall not place a stumbling block before the blind," together.  For each one of them assisted his fellow and set up the other to complete his sin. And there are very many things of this sort about which they said that through them, one transgresses, "you shall not place a stumbling block before the blind." But the simple meaning of the verse is as we said at first. (See Parshat Kedoshim; Mishneh Torah, Laws of Murderer and the Preservation of Life 12.)

Mitzvah 300



Mitzvah 301



Mitzvah 302



Mitzvah 303



Mitzvah 304



Mitzvah 305



Mitzvah 306



Mitzvah 307



Mitzvah 308



Mitzvah 309



Mitzvah 310



Mitzvah 311



Mitzvah 312



Mitzvah 313



Mitzvah 314



Mitzvah 315



Mitzvah 316



Mitzvah 317



Mitzvah 318



Mitzvah 319



Mitzvah 320



Mitzvah 321



Mitzvah 322



Mitzvah 323



Mitzvah 324



Mitzvah 325



Mitzvah 326



Mitzvah 327



Mitzvah 328



Mitzvah 329



Mitzvah 330

Nos prohibió el acto sexual con la madre. Y eso es lo que dice: "la desnudez de tu madre no descubrirás" (Levítico 18:7). Y quien transgrede este mandamiento negativo es [castigado] con la excisión. Y cuando los testigos testifican contra él, es apedreado si fue voluntario. Pero si fue involuntario, debe sacrificar una ofrenda fija por el pecado. (Desde aquí hasta el [Mandamiento Negativo] 352, encontrarás todas las prohibiciones sexuales que están en Parashat Ajarei Mot, véase allí; también véase Mishné Torá, Relaciones Prohibidas 1-4.)

Mitzvah 331



Mitzvah 332



Mitzvah 333



Mitzvah 334



Mitzvah 335



Mitzvah 336

Nos prohibió tener relaciones sexuales con la hija misma. Pero esto no se dejó claro explícitamente en la Torá; y, "la desnudez de tu hija no descubrirás," no apareció en las Escrituras. Sin embargo, dado que mencionó a la hija del hijo y a la hija de la hija, puedes tomarlo como una prueba para aclarar el asunto y revelarlo: ya que prohibió la hija del hijo y la hija de la hija, ¡con mayor razón, la hija [misma]! Y en el Guemará de Yevamot (Yevamot 3a), dijeron: "[Con respecto a] su hija, el aspecto principal de esta prohibición se deriva de la interpretación homilética. Como dijo Rava, 'Rav Yitzḥak bar Avdimi me dijo, "[Esta prohibición se deriva mediante una analogía verbal de las palabras,] suyas (hena), y ellas (hena); y lujuria (zimah) y lujuria (zimah)."'" [Esto] significa decir que Él dijo acerca de la hija de tu hijo y la hija de tu hija, "porque suyas (hena) es tu propia desnudez" (Levítico 18:10). Y Él [también] dijo acerca de la prohibición de una mujer y su hija y la hija de su hijo y la hija de su hija, "ellas (hena) son parientes; es lujuria" (Levítico 18:17). Al igual que con la prohibición de una mujer y su hija, su [verdadera] hija está prohibida; así [también] con la prohibición de la hija de su hijo y la hija de su hija, su [verdadera] hija también está prohibida. Y Él dijo acerca del castigo de "un hombre que tomó una mujer y su madre, es lujuria; serán quemados en fuego, él y ellas" (Levítico 20:14). [Así] también una mujer y la hija de su hijo y la hija de su hija [son castigadas] con quemadura, porque, "lujuria," apareció [también] sobre ellas, así que lo aprendemos de la analogía verbal [creada por el uso común de la palabra,] zimah. Y respecto a este castigo, la misma es la ley para su hija y la hija de su hijo y la hija de su hija. Pues lo aprendemos sobre ellas de la analogía verbal [creada por el uso común de la palabra,] hena. Porque hena está escrito sobre la hija de su hijo y la hija de su hija, tal como aparece con una mujer y su hija. Y el lenguaje del Guemará, Keritot (Keritot 5a), es, "Una analogía verbal nunca debe considerarse a la ligera, ya que [la prohibición de] la hija de uno es una de las leyes esenciales de la Torá, y las Escrituras lo enseñaron solo a través de una analogía verbal. Vino de [el uso común de] hena, y [el uso común de] zimah." Y entiende su dicho, "Las Escrituras lo enseñaron solo," y no diciendo, "y ellos (los Rabinos) lo enseñaron solo," ya que todas estas cosas son una tradición del profeta (Moshe), paz sea con él. Es una explicación que se recibió, como explicamos al comienzo de nuestra gran composición, el Comentario de la Mishná. Sin embargo, las Escrituras [en sí] se abstuvieron de mencionarlo, ya que era posible aprenderlo de una analogía verbal. Y ese es el contenido de su dicho, "Las Escrituras lo enseñaron solo a través de una analogía verbal." Y es suficiente que dijeran, "una de las leyes esenciales de la Torá." He aquí que se explica con todo lo que precede que quien transgrede el mandamiento negativo de su hija y la hija de su hija y la hija de su hijo es [castigado] con quemadura. Pero si el testimonio no fue ratificado, es con excisión si fue voluntario. Y si fue inadvertido con respecto a uno de ellos, debe sacrificar una ofrenda fija por el pecado.

Mitzvah 337

Nos prohibió tener relaciones sexuales con una mujer y su hija. Y eso es Su dicho, bendito sea, "La desnudez de una mujer y su hija no descubrirás" (Levítico 18:17). Y quien transgrede este mandamiento negativo voluntariamente - y eso es cuando una de ellas es su esposa y tiene relaciones sexuales con la otra - es culpable de quema. Pero si el testimonio no fue ratificado, es con excisión si fue voluntario. Y si fue inadvertido, debe sacrificar una ofrenda fija por el pecado.

Mitzvah 338

Nos prohibió tener relaciones sexuales con una mujer y la hija de su hijo. Y eso es lo que Él, bendito sea, dice, "la hija de su hijo" (Levítico 18:17). Y esto también [se castiga] con la quema si fue voluntario. Pero si fue inadvertido, debe traer una ofrenda fija por el pecado.

Mitzvah 339



Mitzvah 340

He prohibited us from sexual intercourse with a sister of the father. And that is His, may He be blessed, saying, "The nakedness of your father's sister you shall not uncover" (Leviticus 18:12). And one who transgresses this negative commandment volitionally is [punished] by excision. But [if] inadvertent, he must bring a fixed sin-offering.

Mitzvah 341

Nos prohibió tener relaciones sexuales con una hermana de la madre. Y eso es lo que dice: "La desnudez de la hermana de tu madre no descubrirás" (Levítico 18:13). Y quien transgrede este mandamiento negativo voluntariamente es castigado con la pena de exterminio. Pero si lo hace inadvertidamente, debe ofrecer un sacrificio fijo por el pecado.

Mitzvah 342



Mitzvah 343



Mitzvah 344



Mitzvah 345



Mitzvah 346



Mitzvah 347



Mitzvah 348



Mitzvah 349



Mitzvah 350



Mitzvah 351



Mitzvah 352

He prohibited - to not have sexual intercourse with the father's brother. And that is His, may He be exalted, saying, "The nakedness of your father's brother you shall not uncover" (Leviticus 18:14) -  such that one who is inadvertent with his father's brother with his father is liable for two sins-offerings, as we explained with his father. And in the Gemara, Sanhedrin (Sanhedrin 54a), they said [that] everyone agrees that one who has sexual intercourse with his father's brother is liable for two [sin-offerings], as it is written, "The nakedness of your father's brother you shall not uncover." And know that my saying, "the testimony has been ratified," is that there be two or more proper witnesses there that warn him and [the testimony] be in a proper court of twenty-three [judges] and they give their testimony about thiem, and that this be in a time when capital punishment is being practiced. And it is clear about all of these sexual prohibitions that have been mentioned above, that excision appeared about them explicitly in the Torah. And that is His saying, after listing them, "For anyone who will do any of these abominations, their souls shall be cut off, those who do these things"  (Leviticus 18:29). And likewise anything about which we mentioned about them, that they are liable for death penalties of the court is also written in the Torah. However the different death penalties - that we should about some of them, stoning, and some of them, strangulation, and some of them, burning - some of them are a tradition and some of them are written in the Torah. And the laws of these sexual prohibitions have been explained in Tractate Sanhedrin and in Keritot.

Mitzvah 353



Mitzvah 354



Mitzvah 355



Mitzvah 356



Mitzvah 357



Mitzvah 358



Mitzvah 359



Mitzvah 360



Mitzvah 361



Mitzvah 362



Mitzvah 363

Él prohibió al rey tener muchos caballos. Y eso es lo que Él dice: "no tendrá muchos caballos" (Deuteronomio 17:16). Y la medida de esto es que no debería tener un caballo que corra delante de él. No debería tener ni siquiera un caballo con él, además del animal en el cual monta, y los caballos que coloca en los establos, para que estén listos para la guerra - que los jinetes montarán. Pero para sí mismo, solo debería tener un único animal. Y las regulaciones de este mandamiento ya han sido explicadas en el segundo [capítulo] de Sanedrín. (Ver Parashat Shoftim; Mishné Torá, Reyes y Guerras 3.)

Mitzvah 364

Que Él prohibió al rey tener muchas esposas. Y eso está expresado en Su dicho: "No tendrá muchas esposas" (Deuteronomio 17:17). Y el límite para esto es que no supere las dieciocho esposas con contrato (ketubah) y matrimonio (kiddushin). Y las regulaciones de este mandamiento ya han sido explicadas en el segundo capítulo de Sanhedrín.