Rambam Introduction to Seder Tahorot
רמב"ם הקדמה לסדר טהרות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Rambam Introduction to Seder Tahorot


In the previous five orders, we have come across and learnt many principles of impurity and purity, in particular within the tractate of Eduyot.  Those mishnayot were brought in those particular orders as an offshoot to a specific topic discussed there, but the main principles and branches are found in this order. Therefore, in my explanation of this order, I won't rely on what was already mentioned previously about impurity and purity. Rather I will discuss the topic as a standalone,  without the need for another order. I will proceed now with an introduction that will be a key to what will be mentioned in this order. That is, all forms of impurity mentioned in the Torah originate from and are connected to some species of living creatures except for Tzaarat (skin affliction) which imparts impurity to clothes and walls without having a person as the source of impurity, as described in the Torah. In addition, all animals cannot impart impurity while they are alive nor do they become impure while alive, except for humans alone. But other species are pure while they are alive and they do not impart impurity nor receive impurity while they are alive. Man alone can become impure while alive and gives off impurity while alive, with impurities that we will discuss.
And within the different types of impurities, according to the language of the Torah, there exists eleven categories: impurity of a sheretz (crawling creatures), impurity of a dead animal, impurity of a corpse, impurity of seminal emission, impurity of the red heifer waters, impurity of sin offerings, impurity of a zav (sickly male discharge), impurity of a zava (sickly female discharge), impurities of a menstruating woman, impurity of a woman after childbirth, and impurity of tzara'at (skin affliction). Within these impurities, some have multiple levels of impurity, while others have only a single level. I will now describe each impurity
The impurity of a sheretz (crawling creature) has only the main level of impurity. The sheretz itself is the primary source of impurity. The name sheretz is associated with the eight species mentioned in the Torah.  The weasel, the mouse, the tortoise, the ferret, the chameleon, the lizard, the snail, and the mole (vayikra 11:29).  The blood of the sheretz, its flesh and fat have an equal status of impurity.  In four of the eight, their skin and flesh are also equal. These four are the ferret, the chameleon, the lizard, and the snail (roughly translated - not halachikly).  Only the bones on its own do not impart impurity. Other creepy crawlies like the frog, beetles, scorpions, snakes and the like are pure and do not impart impurity. 
The impurity of a dead animal has only one main level of impurity. The dead animal itself is the primary source of impurity. The name is associated with a dead animal, whether from livestock or wild. Whether it is ritually pure or impure(kosher or not). The difference between a kosher animal or a non kosher animal is that if a kosher animal is slaughtered in the proper way according to the what is mentioned in chullin (70b) the dead animal is ritually pure. For a non kosher animal there is no difference whether it was slaughtered, torn apart or died naturally. Furthermore, the dead body of a non kosher livestock animal, or a kosher or non kosher wild animal, there is no difference between the flesh and the fat regarding tuma (impurity).  This is not the case with a kosher livestock animal. The fat when it dies never will impart impurity.  I will explain this reasoning in its right place in the tractate Uktzin (Ch3, Mishna 3).  The blood of a dead animal does not impart impurity neither from a kosher non non kosher animal. Also, the skeleton seperated from the meat, the horns, the hoofs and nails, if seperated from the body, do not impart impurity. However, the marrow inside the bones will impure like the flesh. And the marrow of the creeping creature is like its flesh, just as the marrow of the dead is like the flesh of the dead. This is learnt in the tosefta of Ohalot (1:5) where it says that the marrow is considered flesh in every respect. 
And the impurity of a corpse has nine avot (sources). The dead body itself is the primary source of impurity. When I say 'the dead,' I don't refer to any dead but it refers to specific items, if they are the size of an olive or larger, such as its flesh, its marrow, its sinews, its bones, its blood, and anything that comes from its corpse, as detailed in Tractate Ohalot (Chapter 2, Halacha 1). It doesn't make a difference whether the dead is a non Jew or a Jew except for the cases of an Ohel (lit. tent) where a non Jew does not impart purity in an ohel.  This is the language of the gemara (yevamot 81a) A few imparts impurity in an ohel, a gentile does not. This is learnt from the verse (Bamidbar 11:14) "This is the law of a man (Adam) the dies in a tent, and in Yechezkel (34:31) it defines what is an Adam "For you—My flock, the flock that I tend—are man (Adam)".  You are called Adam and the nations of the world are not called Adam.  The grave also imparts impurity.  A person that becomes impure from a dead body is also called an Av (a primary source). Utensils/vessels that touch the dead body are also called an Av Hatuma a primary source of impurity). In addition, if vessels are touching a dead body and a person is touching those vessels and vessels are touching that person, all three are now Av Hatuma. The vessels touching the body, the person and the 2nd vessels. Also, vessels that are touching the vessels that touched a dead body are an Av Hatuma. I will explain each case in the 2nd chapter of Ohalot.  This is all on condition that the person is a Jew, but a non-Jew that touches a dead body does not get the dead body impurity. The beginning of the tosefta Ohalot (h4) says "The non-Jew, the animal, an 8 year old, earthen vessels, food and drink that touch a dead body, vessels that touch them are pure". And the meaning of saying they are 'pure' is that their law is not the same as the law of vessels that come into contact with the impurity of a corpse. I didn't go into this yet to make sure you didn't confuse it with beverages that touch a corpse, but they do become impure with the impurity of beverages, which I am going to explain, not like an Av Tuma to vessels. Another Av Tuma (primary source) is the ohel (tent), and the laws of an ohel and the laws of vessels that are touching a corpse are the same and he is impure for 7 days like the vessels that touch the dead. The reason we counted it separately is because the leather, cloth and sackcloth, if they made a tent over the dead, would become impure unlike other vessels made of wood, earthenware or bone, which would not be impure as a tent. Yes, isn't the law that a wooden or bone vessel which make a tent, become impure like a vessel touching a dead body? I will explain that in the 27th chapter of this tractate. In the tosefta Nidda (ch 6, h10) it says "anyone who becomes impure in a tent becomes impure with the impurity of seven, and there are cases where one becomes impure with the impurity of seven but does not become impure in a tent", this alludes to vessels that can be purified in a Mikve, as we have explained 