Abarbanel on Torah
אברבנאל על תורה
YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
http://www.torontotorah.com

Abarbanel on Torah

Genesis

Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15





















... Without a doubt, as Noach and his children left the boat they were desolate, grieving for the past, ‎and fearful, frightened of the future. This was for four reasons: 1. They mourned the death of their ‎relatives and friends, all of their intimates … 2. They were fearful, frightened of the predatory ‎beasts. When they had been in a political body before, then when a beast came, as in an ambush, ‎many people gathered to kill it … 3. They were anxious, saying, “What shall we eat? We lack the ‎tree fruit which were given as food for Adam, and we lack fruit of the land from which to eat … 4. ‎They feared lest strife and quarrels befall brothers, and lest they kill each other as Kayin had killed ‎Hevel … ‎And when G-d saw that they were desolate for the past and anxious for the future, He addressed ‎their hearts regarding each of these four matters, and He blessed them in ways that matched each ‎of the thoughts in their hearts [in Bereishit 9:1-7].‎ For the first [thought], the lack of relatives and friends who had died in the flood, He told them, ‎‎“Bear fruit and multiply and fill the land.” Meaning: You shall generate relatives and friends from ‎your progeny, and they will be more lovingly loyal than strangers. It is as though He had said, “I will ‎give you great procreative capacity, so that the land will quickly fill up with your children.”‎ For the second thought, their fear of predatory beasts, He said, “And your fear and terror will be ‎upon all of the beasts of the land, and all of the birds of the heavens.” For the human form has a ‎natural domination and authority over all living creatures… “In your hand they have been placed,” ‎meaning to say that  [the animals] had acquired humility and domestication before human beings ‎on the boat, and this would remain.‎‏ ‏For the third thought, the lack of food, He said, “All crawling ‎creatures that live are for you to eat,” as if to say, “If you lack fruit to eat, take your food from the ‎living.”…‎‏ ‏And for the fourth thought, their fear of themselves lest they kill each other, He said, “But ‎only, your blood for your lives I will demand.”‎

Chapter 9



Verse 1

Without a doubt, as Noach and his children left the boat they were desolate, grieving for the past, and fearful, frightened of the future. This was for four reasons: 1. They mourned the death of their relatives and friends, all of their intimates ... 2. They were fearful, frightened of the predatory beasts. When they had been in a political body before, then when a beast came, as in an ambush, many people gathered to kill it... 3. They were anxious, saying, “What shall we eat? We lack the tree fruit which were given as food for Adam, and we lack fruit of the land from which to eat ... 4. They feared lest strife and quarrels befall brothers, and lest they kill each other as Kayin had killed Hevel ...<br> And when G-d saw that they were desolate for the past and anxious for the future, He addressed their hearts regarding each of these four matters, and He blessed them in ways that matched each of the thoughts in their hearts [in Bereishit 9:1-7].<br> For the first [thought], the lack of relatives and friends who had died in the flood, He told them, “Bear fruit and multiply and fill the land.” Meaning: You shall generate relatives and friends from your progeny, and they will be more lovingly loyal than strangers. It is as though He had said, “I will give you great procreative capacity, so that the land will quickly fill up with your children.”<br> For the second thought, their fear of predatory beasts, He said, “And your fear and terror will be upon all of the beasts of the land, and all of the birds of the heavens.” For the human form has a natural domination and authority over all living creatures ... “In your hand they have been placed,” meaning to say that [the animals] had acquired humility and domestication before human beings on the boat, and this would remain.<br> For the third thought, the lack of food, He said, “All crawling creatures that live are for you to eat,” as if to say, “If you lack fruit to eat, take your food from the living.”... <br>And for the fourth thought, their fear of themselves lest they kill each other, He said, “But only, your blood for your lives I will demand.” 

Exodus

Introduction







Leviticus

Introduction







Numbers

Introduction







Deuteronomy

Introduction





