Even Ha'azel on Mishneh Torah, Transmission of the Oral Law
אבן האזל על משנה תורה, מסירת תורה שבעל פה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Even_Ha'azel_on_Mishneh_Torah,_Transmission_of_the_Oral_Law
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Even Ha'azel on Mishneh Torah, Transmission of the Oral Law



Halakhah 1



Halakhah 2



Halakhah 3

"Furthermore, in the introduction, the commandment, which is the explanation of the Torah, was not written but was ordered to the elders, to Yehoshua, and to the rest of Israel, etc. Although the Oral Torah was not written down, Moshe Rabbeinu taught it completely in his court to the seventy elders, to Elazar, to Pinchas, and to Yehoshua; these three received it from Moshe. And Yehoshua, who is Moshe Rabbeinu's talmid (disciple), handed down the Oral Torah and gave instructions regarding it, etc."
"But he ordered this to the elders, the Rambam changed his wording, as he initially wrote 'he ordered this to the elders,' and then wrote: 'Although the Oral Torah was not written, Moshe Rabbeinu taught it to them...,' and then wrote: 'And Yehoshua, who is Moshe Rabbeinu's talmid, handed down the Oral Torah and gave instructions regarding it.' It could be said that one who teaches Torah to many must repeat it first three or four times, as we learn from the verse 'then he saw and reported it,' etc., see Orach Chayim, Siman 139, from the words of the Midrash. And it can also be said that the teacher should make sure even more that the talmid (student) listened and learned well for himself, see Tosafot, Baba Batra 21a, beginning of 'Sach,' in the explanation of Rav Chayim. And what is written, 'and gave instructions regarding it,' means to teach and transmit."

Halakhah 4



Halakhah 5



Halakhah 6



Halakhah 7



Halakhah 8



Halakhah 9



Halakhah 10

And the companions of R' Akiva are R' Tarfon, the teacher of R' Yossi HaGelili, R' Shimon ben Elazar, and R' Yochanan ben Nuri.
See in the introduction to Peirush HaMishnayot, where it is written that Rashba was a companion of Rabi. Perhaps later, when Rabi became greater, he became a companion of Rashba. But in the Yerushalmi, Ma'asrot, chapter 1, halachah 2, R' Yochanan said: 'I was mounted on the shoulders of my grandfather and heard the voice of R' Shimon ben Elazar teaching.' And the Sages said: 'When R' Akiva passed away, Rabi was born' (Kiddushin 72b). Therefore, it is difficult for Rashba to have been a companion of R' Akiva. Perhaps the Rambam's intention is that R' Tarfon was the teacher of R' Yossi HaGelili and Rashba, and that the companions of R' Akiva were R' Tarfon and R' Yochanan ben Nuri. Also see Tosafot in Bava Metzia 4b, s.v. 'Ein Nishba'in', where it is written that Rashba was a student of R' Akiva, which suggests that he was a student of R' Tarfon. Also see the introduction of the Meiri to Pirkei Avot in the fourth chapter, where it is written that he was a companion of R' Shimon ben Gamliel.

Halakhah 11



Halakhah 12

"Moreover, in the introduction, in each generation, the head of the Beit Din or the prophet of that time would write for themselves a record of the traditions they heard from their teachers, and they would teach them orally to many."
"It seems, according to what is written in Ketubot, page 20, that a person can write their testimony in a document and testify about it even after many years. Rav Huna said this applies when they remember on their own; R' Yochanan said, even if they do not remember on their own. Rashi explains Rav Huna’s opinion: if they remember on their own, without looking at the document, they partially recall their testimony by themselves. According to R' Yochanan’s explanation, after seeing the document, they recall in their heart and remember, because they haven’t completely forgotten, so when reminded, they remember. However, if they do not fully remember, they cannot, because the Torah says 'from their mouth and not from their writing'. Therefore, the Oral Torah was not given except for an individual to transmit it orally to another or to many, as written at the beginning of the introduction: 'The Torah and the commandment.' The 'Torah' refers to the Written Torah, and the 'commandment' refers to its explanation, and we are commanded to observe the Torah according to the commandment. This commandment is called the Oral Torah, but it is allowed for each person to write for themselves a record of the traditions. According to Rav Huna, it is necessary for them to remember on their own, so that through the writing, they recall partially by themselves; according to R' Yochanan (and this is the halacha), even if they do not remember on their own, they still remember through the writing. And thus the Rambam generally establishes it."