Rambam on Mishnah Eruvin
רמב"ם על משנה עירובין
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Rambam_on_Mishnah_Eruvin
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Rambam on Mishnah Eruvin



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4

Mishnah: "We only measure with a rope of fifty cubits, etc." Commentary: "This rope should ideally be made of flax and be clear. In every measurement, there will be a slight approximation due to the rope's thickness. Therefore, the Mishnah stipulates that the length of the rope should not be increased or decreased. When it says, 'We only measure against its heart,' it means that one should hold the rope slightly off-center, neither above nor below it. The meaning of the statement 'from its opening' is that the rope should extend from the top, so there is no need to measure the depth of the valley or the height of the wall. It is possible that the width of the valley is fifty cubits or less, which is the measurement of the rope, and the same applies to the height of the wall. If it is impossible, it should be measured as explained later. Regarding the statement 'it reached the mountain from its opening,' it is on the condition that the height is such that when measuring from its length on the ground, it should reach the point where the line falls on the edge of the five cubits, forming a corner standing ten handbreadths high. However, if the height is such that it reaches ten handbreadths at the same point where the line falls and is less than five cubits from the edge of the mountain, then it is considered like a high wall standing on the surface of the ground, and there is no need to measure it; rather, it should be estimated. As long as it does not go beyond the boundary, meaning that the person measuring does not stand outside the boundary when he wants to pass the rope over the high place to see where it will reach. This is because we are concerned that someone might see him when he is measuring and think that he has reached the Shabbat boundary at his standing point. I have heard that they measure with mountains, meaning the person who measures and approximates, and they use the word 'Koder' for cutting, and 'Makhdarin' for cutting the measurement. The Gemara explains this matter, which means that they should take a rope of four cubits and have one person stand at a higher point on the mountain and another at a lower point. The person standing at the higher point should place the end of the rope against his feet, while the person standing at the lower point should place the end of the rope opposite his heart and move away from it by the length of the rope. This way, they should measure the entire distance of four cubits based on this approximation until they know how much they can deduct from the Shabbat boundary. The halacha follows Rabbi Dostai."

Mishnah 5

Mishnah: "We only measure [the Techum Shabbat] according to an expert, etc." Commentary: "An expert is a knowledgeable person who is swift in his work, whether it be in any craft or in wisdom from among the various disciplines. Here, the Mishnah desires that the expert be skilled in surveying and measuring land quickly. Regarding the statement, 'We listen to the one who extends the boundary,' the Gemara explains that if someone says that this area is within the Shabbat boundary, and it is smaller than the measurement we usually consider, or if he says that this area is within the Shabbat boundary and it is larger than what we usually consider, we believe him and rely on him. If he says it is smaller than what we usually consider, we rely on him even though it is larger than what we usually consider, and if he says it is larger than what we usually consider, we rely on him even though it is smaller than what we usually consider. The measurement of the second gate of the city is greater or lesser than that of the Mishnah. Similarly, if one expert disputes another expert, we listen to the majority. This means that if two experts come and each one divides the area differently, we rely on the majority, and we act according to the lenient opinion."
