Derekh HaMelekh
דרך המלך
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Derekh HaMelekh

Kuntres Tiferet Banim

Introduction



Bereshit



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayeshev



Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Tetzaveh



Ki Tisa



Vayikra



Shmini



Kedoshim



Shavuot



Beha'alotcha



Addition for Shemot



Torah

Bereshit



Noach



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



Vayigash



Vayechi



Shemot



Vaera



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim (Shekalim)



Parah



HaChodesh



Tzav (Shabbat HaGadol)



Bamidbar



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Balak



Pinchas



Shabbat Chazon



Vaetchanan (Nachamu)



Eikev



Ha'Azinu



Holidays

Rosh Hashanah



Shabbat Teshuvah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4


...With regard to the 13 Attributes of Divine Compassion that we say: Rashi comments on Parashat Ki Tissa (Ex. 33:19) that YHVH said to Moses, "You see me wrap myself [in a tallit] and call out the 13 Attributes; and you must teach the Israelites to do the same." Why did YHVH need to do so, call out Godself? Why was it not enough to command that the prayer leader wrap in a tallit and call out?
...We find that the Kedushat Levi (Rabbi Levi Yitzchak of Berditchev, 1740-1809) comments, “In each member of the people of Israel there is a portion of divinity. And when one calls out and prays with this divine portion, then the divine portion itself is calling out to YHVH. This is the meaning of ‘YHVH, YHVH’ [in the verse]: that YHVH [within the person] calls out to YHVH.”

In truth, the essence of prayer is always dependent on whether YHVH is praying. As the Talmud says, “How do we know that the Holy Blessed One prays?” (Brachot 7a) We should say that it is always through the prayer of the individual Jew that the Holy Blessed One prays. If not, what use would a person’s prayer be—a prayer that is made up of human language? How could it change the Divine will from anger to compassion? 
But that divine portion within a person does not always pray. It only prays within one who is connected with their own divine aspect—whose body is not a thing unto itself, and whose soul is not a thing unto itself, like two neighbors who happen to live in the same house but who are nevertheless separate and distant from one another. Rather, the body must desire to be a servant of the spirit, to follow the activation of the soul—and not simply follow its own whims. Then, when one comes to pray, the Holy Blessed Ones prays too, as we have described.
“From the depths I called to you, YHVH.” It is as if to say, ‘My words are not words of prayer, but rather, My own depths cry out.’ And this is hinted at: “Just as you see me wrapped in a tallit and calling out the 13 attributes, you must teach Israel to do the same—” that they should make it so that I am calling out and praying through them.


Yom Kippur



Sukkot



Shemini Atzeret



Simchat Torah



Chanukkah



Purim



Pesach



Shavuot



Lectures, Articles and Epistles

Shabbat Teshuvah Sermon



Introduction to Commentary on Zohar



Commentary on Zohar



A Recovered Essay from Chovat HaAvreichim



A Dispensation for Chovat HaTalmidim



Siyum HaShas



Epistles



Lecture to the Yeshivah Students



Mind Quieting Advice



Epistle for the High Holidays



Epistle for Pesach



Essay on Education



Sermon on the Great Congress

