Mishneh Torah, Paschal Offering
משנה תורה, הלכות קרבן פסח
Mishneh Torah, trans. by Eliyahu Touger. Jerusalem, Moznaim Pub. c1986-c2007
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH001020101/NLI

Mishneh Torah, Paschal Offering



Chapter 1

It is a positive commandment to offer the Paschal sacrifice on the fourteenth day of the month of Nisan after midday. This offering is brought only from lambs or goats, a male in its first year. Both men and women are obligated in this mitzvah.
One who willfully nullifies this mitzvah and allows the fourteenth of Nisan to pass without him offering the Paschal sacrifice despite the fact that he is not impure or not on a distant journey, he is liable for <i>karet</i>. If he neglected the offering of this sacrifice inadvertently, he is exempt.
The Paschal sacrifice may be slaughtered only in the Temple Courtyard like other sacrifices. Even when sacrificing in high places was permitted, the Paschal sacrifice would not be offered on an individual altar. Anyone who offers the Paschal sacrifice on an individual altar is liable for lashes as if he offered it in the market place, as Deuteronomy 16:5 states" "You may not sacrifice the Paschal sacrifice in one of your gates." According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught that this is warning not to slaughter a Paschal sacrifice on an individual altar even during the time when sacrificing on the high places was permitted.
The slaughter of the Paschal sacrifice takes place after midday. It should not be slaughtered until the afternoon daily offering is slaughtered. After the afternoon incense offering is brought and the lamps of the <i>Menorah</i> are kindled, they begin slaughtering the Paschal sacrifices and continue until the end of the day.<br>If one slaughtered the Paschal sacrifice after midday, but before the afternoon daily sacrifice was offered, it is acceptable, but one should stir the blood of the Paschal sacrifice until the blood of the daily offering is cast on the altar. Afterwards, the blood of the Paschal sacrifice should be cast after it. If, however, the blood of the Paschal sacrifice is cast before the blood of the daily offering, it is acceptable.
A person who slaughters the Paschal sacrifice at the appropriate time while possessing an olive-sized portion of <i>chametz</i> is liable for lashes, as Exodus 23:18 states: "Do not slaughter sacrificial blood over <i>chametz</i>, i.e., that one should not offer the Paschal sacrifice while <i>chametz</i> continues to exist in his possession.<br>Whether one slaughters, casts the blood on the altar, or offers the organs and fats, if one of these individuals or one of the members of the company partaking of this Paschal sacrifice possessed <i>chametz</i> in his domain at the time it is offered, he is liable for lashes. The sacrifice is, however, acceptable.
The blood of the Paschal sacrifice should be poured out on the base of the altar. After the blood was poured, its belly should be opened up, the fats and organs to be offered on the altar removed. The fats of each Paschal sacrifice should be offered on the pyre individually. The owner of the sacrifice should take his Paschal sacrifice with its hide to his home in Jerusalem.There he roasts it and eats it in the evening.
When one leaves these fats and organs and does not offer them until they remain overnight and thus become disqualified because they remained overnight, he violates a negative commandment, as Exodus 23:18 states: "Do not leave over the festive fats until the morning." Even though he transgresses, he is not liable for lashes, for the prohibition does not involve a deed.
The fats of the Paschal sacrifice may be offered on the altar's pyre until dawn.<br>When does the above apply? When the fourteenth of Nisan falls on the Sabbath, for fats of sacrifices offered on the Sabbath may be offered on a festival. If, however, the fourteenth fell on a weekday, this leniency is not taken, because we do not offer the fats of sacrifices offered on a weekday on a festival.
The Paschal sacrifice should be offered in three groups, as implied by Exodus 12:6 "And all of the congregation of the community of Israel shall slaughter it." Three collective terms are used "congregation," community," and "Israel." There should be no less than 30 people in each group.
If there were only 50 people who came to slaughter the Paschal sacrifice, thirty enter the Temple Courtyard and slaughter their sacrificial animals. Ten depart and another ten enter. Then ten more depart and another ten enter.
If there are less than 50 people who seek to offer Paschal sacrifices, the initial preference is not to offer that sacrifice. If, however, it was offered, it is acceptable. If all the Jewish people slaughtered their Paschal sacrifices at one time, it is acceptable.<br>How is the Paschal sacrifice slaughtered? The first group enters the Temple Courtyard until it is full. Its gates are locked and they begin slaughtering their Paschal sacrifices. As long as they are slaughtering and offering the blood, the Levites recite the <i>Hallel</i>. If they completed its recitation before the group completed its sacrifice, the <i>Hallel</i> is repeated. If they completed its repetition before the group completed its sacrifice, the <i>Hallel</i> is recited a third time. There was never a situation where the <i>Hallel</i> was completed a third time.
For every time the <i>Hallel</i> is read, three blasts are sounded with the trumpets, a <i>tekiah, teruah</i>, and <i>tekiah</i>. Since these sacrifices are not accompanied by libations for the trumpets to be sounded when they are offered, they are sounded when the sacrifices are slaughtered.
The priests stand in lines, holding silver and gold vessels in their hands. One line would all hold silver ones and another, all gold, without them mixing together so that it would be attractive.<br>The vessels did not have flat bottoms so that they would not be placed down and the blood allowed to coagulate.
A slaughterer slaughters the sacrificial animal and a priest receives its blood, gives it to his colleague, who gives it to his colleague - so that many will be involved in the mitzvah - until the blood reaches the priest near the altar. He should pour it in a single action towards the altar's base. He receives a full vessel and returns the empty one.<br>Afterwards, the sacrificial animal is hung and skinned entirely. Its belly is ripped open and its innards are pressed until the filth and waste are removed from them. The organs and fats to be offered are removed, placed in a vessel, salted, and offered by a priest on the altar.<br>How is the sacrificial animal hung and skinned? There were iron pegs affixed in the walls and the pillars of the Temple Courtyard. The sacrificial animals were hung and skinned on them. For those who did not find a place to hang his animal, there were thin, smooth rods. One would place the rod on his shoulder and on his friend's shoulder and hang the sacrificial animal on it and skin it.
After the sacrifice was completed, the gates of the Temple Courtyard are opened. The first group departs and the second group enters. Then the second group departs and the third group enters. The manner in which it was offered the first time was repeated the second time and the third time. When the third group completed its sacrificial service and departed, the Temple Courtyard is washed.
If the fourteenth of Nisan fell on the Sabbath, it was offered on the Sabbath in the same way as it was offered during the week. The floor of the Temple Courtyard would be washed, for prohibitions of the category of <i>shvut</i> are not observed in the Temple, even when the matter is not necessary for the Temple service. For the prohibitions of <i>shvut</i> are released entirely in the Temple.
No one would bring their Paschal sacrifices to their homes on the Sabbath. Instead, the first group would depart with their Paschal sacrifices and sit on the Temple Mount. The second group would depart with their Paschal sacrifices and sit on the surrounding rampart. And the third group would stand in their place in the Temple Courtyard. They would all wait until the conclusion of the Sabbath and then everyone would bring their Paschal sacrifice to his home.
The slaughter of the Paschal sacrifice, pouring its blood on the altar, pressing out its innards, and offering its fats supersede the Sabbath prohibitions. For it is impossible to perform these before the Sabbath, because the sacrifice has a fixed time, as implied by Numbers 9:2 which states that the sacrifice must be brought "at its appointed time." Nevertheless, carrying it through the city, bringing it from outside the Sabbath limits, cutting off its wart with a utensil do not supersede the Sabbath prohibitions, because these activities could be performed before the Sabbath. If, however, he could cut it off by hand on the Sabbath, he may. If it was dried up, he may cut it off, even with a utensil, for the prohibitions defined as <i>shvut</i> do not apply in the Temple at all.<br>Similarly, roasting it and washing out its innards do not supersede the Sabbath prohibitions, because these activities can be performed after the Sabbath.
If one forgot and did not bring a knife, he should not bring it on the Sabbath. Instead, he should place it between the horns of the lamb or in its wool and spur it on until it brings it to the Temple. There he should consecrate it. Although he is having an animal carry a burden for him on the Sabbath, since he is doing this in an abnormal manner and because of the mitzvah, it was permitted.<br>When does this apply? When he has not consecrated his Paschal sacrifice as of yet or said: "This is a Paschal sacrifice." If, however, he consecrated it, he should not have a knife carried upon it, because he is having work performed by a consecrated animal.<br>Why was a person permitted to consecrate his Paschal sacrifice on the Sabbath? Since the sacrifice has a fixed time, it is permitted to consecrate it on the Sabbath. Similarly, a person may consecrate his festive offering on a festival without any concern.
When a person slaughters his Paschal sacrifice and it is discovered to have a disqualifying physical blemish or it is <i>treifah</i>. he may slaughter another one whether on the weekday or on the Sabbath. He may proceed and slaughter one hundred one after the other until one is acceptable or until night falls and his offering of the sacrifice is postponed until the Second Pesach, because he was prevented by forces beyond his control.

Chapter 2

The Paschal sacrifice should be slaughtered only for the sake of those who were enumerated for partaking of it, as Exodus 13:4 states: "Everyone... should be enumerated on the lamb." The implication is that one should be enumerated on it while it is alive. Those enumerated on a Paschal sacrifice are referred to as "the members of the company."
When one individual sacrifices a Paschal sacrifice for himself alone, it is acceptable, provided he is capable of partaking of it in its entirety. As an initial preference, an endeavor is made not to sacrifice the Paschal sacrifice for the sake of one individual alone, for Numbers 9:12 states: "They shall offer it."
The Paschal sacrifice should be slaughtered only for those who are fit to partake of it. If one of the members of the company was a minor, an elder person, or infirm, he may be counted among those for whom the Paschal sacrifice is slaughtered if he is capable of eating an olive-sized portion. If not, he may not be counted among them, as implied by Exodus 12:4: "A person according to his capacity to eat," indicating that he must be fit to partake of it. Even if the company includes 100, if any one of them is not capable of eating an olive-sized portion, he may not be counted among those for whom it is slaughtered.
A company should not be composed of solely women and servants or minors and servants so that frivolity will not be found among them. A company may, however, be made entirely of women even for the second Paschal sacrifice or entirely of servants. Minors may be counted among the company for whom the Paschal sacrifice is slaughtered, but a company may not be comprised solely of minors, for they are not intellectually mature.<br>Similarly, a company should not be made up solely of the infirm, the elderly, or those in an acute state of mourning. Even though they are capable of eating, since they will eat only a meager amount, it is possible that they will leave over from the Paschal sacrifice and cause it to become unacceptable. If they transgressed and had a Paschal sacrifice slaughtered for such a company, it is acceptable. Similarly, a company should not be made up solely of converts, lest they not be precise concerning it and cause it to be disqualified. If a Paschal sacrifice was slaughtered for such a company, it is acceptable.
If a Paschal sacrifice was slaughtered for people who were not enumerated upon it or for individuals whom none could eat an olive-sized portion or it was slaughtered for the uncircumcised or those impure, it is unacceptable. If it was slaughtered for one who could partake of it and one who could not partake of an olive-sized portion, for those enumerated on it and for others not enumerated on it, for circumcised and uncircumcised, for the pure and the impure, it is acceptable. Those who are fit to partake of it eat according to law; it is as if he did not have the others in mind.
If the Paschal sacrifice was slaughtered for the sake of the circumcised, but its blood was cast on the altar for the sake of the circumcised and the uncircumcised, it is unacceptable. The rationale is that casting the blood is more severe, because it is the fundamental dimension of the sacrifice.<br>If he slaughtered it for the circumcised so that the uncircumcised will derive atonement through it, it is unacceptable, because he had the uncircumcised in mind when casting the blood. If he slaughtered it for the sake of those who would partake of it so that its blood would be cast for those who would not partake of it, the Paschal sacrifice is acceptable, but no one fulfills their obligation with it, because the ones who will partake of it were not in mind when the blood was cast.
When one was healthy at the time the sacrificial animal was slaughtered, but sick at the time its blood was cast or sick at the time of slaughter, but healthy at the time the blood was cast, the sacrificial animal should not be slaughtered, nor its blood cast for him unless he is healthy from the time it was slaughtered until its blood was cast.
A person may have a sacrificial animal slaughtered for the sake of his son or daughter who are below majority and for his Canaanite servants and maidservants, whether with their consent or without their consent. He may not, however, slaughter for the sake of his son or daughter who are above majority or for the sake of his Hebrew servants and maidservants or for the sake of his wife without their consent. If they were silent and did not protest, they are considered to have consented.
If one slaughtered a sacrificial animal for the sake of his son or daughter who are below majority and/or for his Canaanite servants and maidservants and they went and had one slaughtered for themselves, they fulfill their obligation by partaking of their master's sacrifice.
If one slaughtered a sacrificial animal for the sake of his wife, his son or daughter who are above majority and/or for his Hebrew servants and maidservants and they went and had one slaughtered for themselves, there is no greater protest than this. They fulfill their obligation by partaking of their own sacrifice.
When a woman is living in her husband's home and her father slaughters for her and her husband slaughters for her, she should partake of her husband's. If she was hurrying to go to her father's home on the first festival after her wedding as is the pattern of all women and both her father and her husband slaughtered for her, she should partake of her father's. From this point onward, she should eat at the place she desires, provided it is clear where she desires to eat at the time of slaughter.<br>Similarly, if two guardians sacrifice on behalf of an orphan, the orphan should eat where he desires. When does the above apply? To an orphan below majority. If, however, he is above majority, it is as if he was enumerated on two Paschal sacrifices. And when one enumerates himself on two Paschal sacrifices, he may partake only of the one slaughtered first.
With regard to a Canaanite servant of two partners, if they are untrusting of each other, suspecting that the other will steal the servant, he should not partake of either of their Paschal sacrifice. If they are not untrusting, he may eat where he desires.
A person who is half a servant and half free, he should not partake of his masters, nor of his own until he attains his freedom.
To what extent can people be enumerated on a Paschal sacrifice? Until there is an olive-sized portion for each one.<br>One may be enumerated upon it and remove himself from it until it is slaughtered. Once it is slaughtered, he may not remove himself from it, for it was already slaughtered on his behalf.<br>The following rules apply when some people were enumerated on a sacrificial animal and others came and enumerated themselves on the same animal. If there is an olive-sized portion for the first, they may partake of it and are exempt from bringing a second Paschal sacrifice. The later ones who were added until there was not an olive-sized portion for each person should not partake of it and are obligated to offer a second Paschal sacrifice.
When a person enumerates others on his portion of the Paschal sacrifice without the other members of his company knowing, the members of the company are entitled to give him his portion after it was roasted at the time when the sacrifice is eaten. The members of the company partake of their portion and he eats together with the others whom he enumerated in a second company.<br>Similarly, if one of the members of a company is a glutton, the members of the company are permitted to remove him and give him his portion which he will eat in his own company. If he is not a glutton, they may not divide.

Chapter 3

The following rules apply when a person tells his servant: "Go and sacrifice a Paschal sacrifice for me." Even though his master usually slaughters a lamb every year and the servant slaughtered a goat - or his master would usually slaughter a goat and he went and slaughtered a lamb, the master may partake of it, since he did not explicitly say: "Slaughter this particular type."<br>If the servant went and slaughtered both a kid and a lamb, the master may not partake of either of them. Instead, they should be taken to the place where sacrifices are burnt, because one may not be enumerated on two Paschal sacrifices. If, however, it was a king or queen who told his servant to sacrifice an animal for him and the servant slaughtered a kid and a lamb, the king or queen may partake of the one slaughtered first. This leniency was granted to placate the king.
When one tells his agent: "Go out and slaughter a Paschal sacrifice for me" and establishes that he wants either a kid or a lamb slaughtered, but the agent forgot what the principal told him, the agent should slaughter both a kid and a lamb and say: "If the principal told me to slaughter a kid, the kid should be his and the lamb, mine. If he told me to slaughter a lamb, the lamb should be his and the kid, mine."<br>In such a situation, if the principal also forgot what he told the agent, both animals should be taken to the place where sacrifices are burnt. If the principal forgot before the blood was cast on the altar, they are obligated to bring a second Paschal sacrifice. If he forgot after the blood was cast on the altar, he is exempt from bring a second Paschal sacrifice.<br>The same also applies if one tells a Canaanite servant: "Go and slaughter a Paschal sacrifice for me," and he established the type of sacrifice he desired and the servant forgot what his master told him, provided the shepherd of his master gives him a kid and a lamb and tells him: "Slaughter both of them so that you will have slaughtered one according to the instructions of your master. And one shall be yours on the condition that your master has no portion in it." If the shepherd does this, it will be possible for the servant to make the stipulation described above.
The following rules apply if the members of a company tell a person: "Go and slaughter a Paschal sacrifice for us," and he tells them: "And you should slaughter for me." If they slaughtered an animal and he slaughtered an animal, they should eat from the animal slaughtered first and the one slaughtered last should be taken to the place where sacrifices are burnt.
The following laws apply when the animal designated as a Paschal sacrifice of a company is lost and they tell one of the members of the company: "Go, search for it, and slaughter it for us." He went, found the Paschal sacrifice that was lost, and slaughtered it and they took another animal for a Paschal sacrifice and slaughtered it. If his was slaughtered first, he partakes of his sacrifice and they partake of it with him and the second one should be burnt. If theirs was slaughtered first, they should partake of their sacrifice and he should partake of his own. If it is not known which was slaughtered first or they were both slaughtered at the same time, he should partake of his own, but they should not eat with him. Their sacrifice should be taken to the place where sacrifices are burnt, but they are exempt from bringing a second Paschal sacrifice.
The following laws apply when the agent told the members of the company who sent him to search for the Paschal sacrifice that was lost and to slaughter it: "If I come late, slaughter a Paschal sacrifice for me," and then he went and found the lost animal and slaughtered it, but they also took another animal for a Paschal sacrifice and slaughtered it. If theirs is slaughtered first, they should partake of their own and he should eat with them. The second one should be burnt. If his is slaughtered first, he should partake of his own and they should partake of their own. If it is not known which was slaughtered first or they were both slaughtered at the same time, they should partake of theirs, but he does not partake of it with them. His sacrifice should be taken to the place where sacrifices are burnt, but he is exempt from bringing a second Paschal sacrifice.
The following laws apply if the Paschal sacrifice of a company was lost and the Paschal sacrifice of an individual was lost. He told them: "Go, search for it, and slaughter for me" and they told him: "Go, search for it, and slaughter for us." If he went, found the lost animal, and slaughtered it and they went, found the lost animal, and slaughtered it, they should all eat from the first one slaughtered and the second should be burnt. If it is not known which was slaughtered first or they were both slaughtered at the same time, they should both be burnt and they are all exempt from bringing a second Paschal sacrifice.<br>If he went to search for the lost animal and they went to search for the lost animal, but they did not tell each other anything, neither one has any responsibility to the other. Since they said nothing explicitly and did not tell each other anything, this applies even if, in their hearts, they had the intent that each one would slaughter for the other and there were gestures and other matters from which it could be assessed that they all agreed that whoever finds the lost animal should slaughter for the sake of the other.
The following rules apply when the Paschal sacrifices of two companies become intermingled before they are slaughtered. One company takes one lamb from the mixture and the other takes the second. One of the members of one company should go to the other and one of the members of the second company should go the first. Each of the companies say to the person who came to join them: "If this Paschal sacrifice is ours, you are removed from your Paschal sacrifice and enumerated on ours. If, however, this Paschal sacrifice is yours, we are removed from our Paschal sacrifice and enumerated on yours."<br>Similarly, if there were five groups with at least five persons in each or ten groups of at least ten, a member of every company is taken to each other company and such stipulations are made. Afterwards, they slaughter the sacrificial animals.
When the Paschal sacrifices of two individuals become intermingled, one should take one of the Paschal sacrifices that are intermingled and the other should take the other. One should add another outsider to his Paschal sacrifice and the other should add an outsider, so that there be two companies. Afterwards, one of the two will go to the others and one of the others will go to the one and each one will stipulate with the person who came to him from the other company. Each should say: "If this Paschal sacrifice is mine, you are removed from your Paschal sacrifice and enumerated on mine. If, however, this Paschal sacrifice is yours, I am removed from our Paschal sacrifice and enumerated on yours." Thus no one has lost anything.
When the hides of the Paschal sacrifices of five companies become intermingled and a disqualifying growth was discovered on the hide of one of them, all the sacrifices must be taken to the place where sacrifices are burnt. If they were intermingled before the blood was cast on the altar, they are all obligated to bring the second Paschal sacrifice.<br>If, however, the sacrificial animals became intermingled after the blood was cast, they are exempt from bringing the second Paschal sacrifice. For if they would offer a second Paschal sacrifice, the ones who offered an acceptable sacrifice on the first Pesach will be bringing non-sacrificial animals to the Temple Courtyard. If they would all be enumerated on one Paschal sacrifice, it would be slaughtered for those who are not obligated. That is equivalent to having it sacrificed for the sake of those who were not enumerated upon it. If each one of them brought a sacrifice for the second Paschal sacrifice and made a stipulation saying: "If it is not a Paschal sacrifice, it should be considered as a peace-offering," that is undesirable. For the blood of the Paschal sacrifice is poured on the altar, while the blood of a peace-offering is dashed and, as an initial preference, blood that should be dashed should not be poured. Hence they are exempt from a second Paschal sacrifice.

Chapter 4

We already explained in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i> that a Paschal sacrifice is slaughtered only for the sake of a Paschal sacrifice and only for the sake of its owners. If it was slaughtered for the sake of another type of sacrifice, it is unacceptable.<br>When a person slaughters a Paschal sacrifice for the members of a company and, at a later time, told them: "That Paschal sacrifice that I slaughtered for you was not slaughtered with the proper intent," they should rely on his words if they consider him trustworthy. If not, according to the letter, his word is not accepted. If one desires to be stringent with himself and bring a second Paschal sacrifice, he is praiseworthy.
When the meat of the Paschal sacrifice becomes impure and one becomes aware of this before the blood is poured on the altar, it should not be poured on the altar even though the fats and organs are pure. The rationale is that the Paschal sacrifice is offered only with the intent that it be eaten. If the blood is poured on the altar, it is not acceptable.<br>If one does not become aware until the blood was poured, it is acceptable. For the High Priest's forehead plate generates appeasement for blood offered unintentionally when meat became impure, but it does not generate appeasement for intentional violation.<br>If a portion of the limbs of the Paschal sacrifice become impure, he should burn those which became impure and partake of those which are pure. If the fats and organs become impure while the meat is intact, the blood should be poured and the meat eaten in the evening.<br>If the owners become impure after the Paschal sacrifice was slaughtered, the blood should not be poured. If it is poured, it is not acceptable. Therefore they are obligated to bring a second Paschal sacrifice. For the High Priest's forehead plate does not generate appeasement for bodily impurity unless the person became impure due to "impurity likened to the depths," as we explained in <i>Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash</i>.
When a Paschal sacrifice was taken out of Jerusalem or it became impure on the fourteenth of Nisan, it should be burnt immediately. When the owners became impure, died, or remove themselves - even if they became impure or died before the blood was poured on the altar - it should be left overnight and burnt afterwards.<br>This is the general principle: Whenever there is a disqualifying factor involving the actual body of the sacrifice, it should be burnt immediately. If the disqualifying factor involves the blood or the owners, it should be left overnight and then burnt. Therefore if it was slaughtered after it was known that the owners removed themselves from the sacrifice, died, or became impure and thus their obligation was postponed until the second Pesach, their first Paschal sacrifice should be burnt immediately.<br>When does the statement that the Paschal sacrifice should be burnt if the owners become impure apply? When all of the members of the company become impure. If, however, only some of them become impure, those who remain pure acquire the portions of those who became impure. Even if those who became impure incurred their impurity after they began eating, those who were pure who did not begin eating as of yet, acquire their portion.<br>If, however, all of them began eating and some of them became impure, those who remain pure do not acquire the portions of those who became impure. Instead, those who remain pure should partake of their portions and the portions of those who became impure should be burnt. This also applies if a portion of the owners died.<br>If the Paschal sacrifice became impure after those impure began eating, those who remained pure acquire their portions. If, however, they all had begun to eat and some of them became impure, those who remained pure do not acquire the portions of those who became impure. Instead, those who remained pure should eat their own portion and the portions of those who became impure should be burnt. These same laws apply if some of those enumerated on the sacrifice died.<br>If the entire Paschal sacrifice or its majority becomes impure, it should be burnt in front of the Temple in the presence of everyone to embarrass its owners, so that in the future they will show greater care. It should be burnt with wood designated for the altar so that suspicion about them will not be aroused and it be said: "They stole wood designated for the altar." Therefore if they burn it with straw and reeds and desire to burn it with their own straw, they may.<br>If less than half of it became impure, and similarly, any meat left over from the Paschal sacrifice, should be burnt in their own courtyards from their own wood. Wood designated for the altar should not be used, so that it will not remain in their possession and they misappropriate it.
If one set aside a female animal for his Paschal sacrifice or a male animal in its second or third year of life, it should be allowed to pasture until it contracts a disqualifying blemish. Then it should be sold and a Paschal sacrifice brought with the proceeds of the sale. If it did not contract a blemish until after he offered his Paschal sacrifice, he should bring a peace-offering with the proceeds of the sale.
When a person sets aside a Paschal sacrifice and dies, his son should not bring it afterwards as a Paschal sacrifice, but as a peace-offering. If the son was enumerated on the Paschal sacrifice together with his father, he may bring it as a Paschal sacrifice.<br>When does the above apply? When his father dies after midday on the fourteenth of Nisan. If, however, he died before midday on the fourteenth, the son is deferred to the second Pesach, because he is in the acute state of <i>onain</i> mourning, as will be explained. He should bring this animal as a Paschal sacrifice on the second Pesach.
The following laws apply if a person's Paschal sacrifice was lost and then he found it after he set aside another Paschal sacrifice and they are both standing before him. He should sacrifice whichever one he desires for the sake of a Paschal sacrifice and the other should be offered as a peace-offering.<br>If he finds it after he slaughtered another animal as a Paschal sacrifice, the one that he found should be offered as a peace-offering. Similarly, if he transferred the holiness of the animal he found after the slaughter of its replacement, the animal unto which the holiness was transferred should be sacrificed as a peace-offering. If, however, he found it before the other he set aside was slaughtered, different rules apply. Since the animal that was found is fit to be offered as a Paschal sacrifice and it is fit to be offered as a peace-offering, as explained above, if he transferred the holiness of the animal that was found whether before the slaughter of the one designated in its place or afterwards, the animal to which its holiness is transferred is not sacrificed. Instead, it is left to pasture until it contracts a blemish. Then a peace-offering is brought with the proceeds of its sale.
An animal designated as a Paschal sacrifice that becomes more than a year old or a peace-offering brought from an animal that was originally designated as Paschal sacrifice is considered as a peace-offering in all contexts. It requires <i>semichah</i>, accompanying offerings, and the waving of the breast and thigh. These requirements do not apply with regard to the Paschal sacrifice.
When an animal designated as a Paschal sacrifice becomes intermingled with animals designated as peace-offerings, they should all be brought as peace-offerings. If it became intermingled with an animal designated as another type of offering, the two should be allowed to pasture until they contract disqualifying physical blemishes. An animal equivalent to the value of the more expensive of the two should be brought for each type of sacrifice and the owner should forfeit the remainder from his resources, as explained in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i>.<br>If a Paschal sacrifice becomes intermingled with firstborn animals, they should be allowed to pasture until they contract disqualifying physical blemishes and then they should be eaten according to the laws pertaining to a blemished firstborn animal. And he should bring an animal equivalent to the most valuable one in the mixture and say: "Wherever the Paschal sacrifice is, its holiness should be transferred to this animal." That animal should be brought as a peace-offering if his Paschal sacrifice was already offered.
When one sets aside an animal for a Paschal sacrifice before he converts and then converts or a Canaanite servant sets one aside before he is freed and then he is freed, or a child sets one aside before he manifests signs of physical maturity and then he manifests them, he may offer it for the sake of a Paschal sacrifice. The rationale is that living animals are not deemed unacceptable forever, as explained in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i>.
If one set aside money for his Paschal sacrifice and there was some left over, he should use the remainder for a peace-offering. If someone enumerates others on his Paschal sacrifice and festive offering, the money he takes from them for their portion is considered as ordinary funds. Even though this one set aside a lamb for his Paschal sacrifice and this one set aside money, and then one took that money and enumerated the other on his Paschal sacrifice, the money is considered as ordinary funds. For the Jews consecrated their Paschal sacrifices and festive offerings and the money for their Paschal sacrifices and festive offerings with this stipulation.
The wood used for roasting the Paschal sacrifice is equivalent to the Paschal sacrifice. Similarly, the <i>matzah</i> and bitter herbs, since they are necessary elements for the Paschal sacrifice, are equivalent to the Paschal sacrifice. If one took money from the money for the Paschal sacrifice from someone who was enumerated with him to enumerate him on the <i>matzah</i> and the bitter herbs or so that he will own a portion of the wood used to roast it, the money is considered as ordinary funds.

Chapter 5

When someone was impure at the time of the slaughter of the Paschal sacrifice and the Paschal sacrifice could not be slaughtered for him, was "on a distant way," he was prevented because of other reasons, or inadvertently failed to offer the first Paschal sacrifice, he should bring a Paschal sacrifice on the fourteenth of the second month in the afternoon. Slaughtering this Paschal sacrifice is an independent positive commandment and supersedes the Sabbath prohibitions. For the second Pesach is not compensation for the first, but an independent festival. Therefore one is liable for <i>karet</i> for failing to bring the sacrifice.
What is implied? If a person inadvertently or because of forces beyond his control failed to offer the first Paschal sacrifice, if he intentionally refrained from offering the second, he is liable for <i>karet</i>. If he inadvertently did not offer the second Paschal sacrifice or was held back due to forces beyond his control, he is exempt from <i>karet</i>. If he intentionally did not offer the first Paschal sacrifice, he may offer the second. If he did not offer the second Paschal sacrifice, even if his lapse was unintentional, he is liable for <i>karet</i>. The rationale is that he did not offer God's sacrifice at the appointed time and was willful in his omission. If, however, he was impure or "on a distant way" and did not offer the first Paschal sacrifice, he is not liable for <i>karet</i> even though he willfully did not bring the second. The rationale is that on the first Pesach, he was already exempt from <i>karet</i>.
When someone was "on a distant way" on the fourteenth of Nisan, but the Paschal sacrifice was nevertheless sacrificed on his behalf and the blood was poured on the altar for him, it is not accepted and he is obligated to offer a second Paschal sacrifice even though he came in the evening.
When a person is impure, but could purify himself to partake of the first Paschal sacrifice, and yet refrains from immersing himself and instead, remains in a state of impurity until the time for offering the sacrifices passes, he is considered as having intentionally failed to sacrifice the first Paschal sacrifice. This ruling also applies to an uncircumcised person who does not circumcise himself until the time for the sacrifice passes. Therefore if these individuals do not offer the second Paschal sacrifice - even if their failure to do so is inadvertent - they are liable for <i>karet</i>.
Just as the failure to circumcise oneself holds a person back from offering the Paschal sacrifice, so too, the failure to circumcise one's children below the age of majority and the failure to circumcise all of one's Canaanite servants, whether above majority or below majority, holds him back, as Exodus 12:48 states: "He shall circumcise all males, then he will draw close to offer it." If one offered the Paschal sacrifice before circumcising the above individuals, the Paschal sacrifice is invalidated.<br>Similarly, the immersion of one's Canaanite maidservants in a <i>mikveh</i> for the sake of servitude holds one back from offering the Paschal sacrifice. This matter is part of the received tradition: immersion for maidservants is equivalent to circumcision for servants.
The circumcision of his servants and the immersion of his maidservants does not prevent a minor from being enumerated on a Paschal sacrifice, as indicated by <i>ibid.</i>:44: "Any servant of a man." This excludes a minor.
A convert who converts between the first Pesach and the second Pesach and similarly, a child who comes of age between these two holidays are obligated to offer the second Paschal sacrifice. If one slaughtered the first Paschal sacrifice for the sake of the minor, the minor is exempt from bringing the second sacrifice.
When the obligation of women is postponed until the second Pesach, whether because of forces beyond their control, inadvertent omission, impurity, or because they were "on a distant way," offering the second Paschal sacrifice is optional for them. If they desire, they may have the offering slaughtered; if they do not desire, they don't. Therefore one should not slaughter a Paschal sacrifice only for women when the second Pesach falls on the Sabbath. If, however, a woman is part of the company offering a second Paschal sacrifice, it is permitted.<br>What is meant by the term "on a distant way" which exempts a person from bringing a Paschal sacrifice? Fifteen <i>mil</i> outside the walls of Jerusalem.
If one was fifteen <i>mil</i> or more outside of Jerusalem at the appearance of the sun on the fourteenth of Nisan, he is considered to be "on a distant way." If he was closer than this, he is not considered to be "on a distant way," because he could reach Jerusalem after midday while walking comfortably by foot.<br>If he journeyed and did not reach Jerusalem in time, because he was held back by a press of animals or he was in Jerusalem, but was infirm in his legs and did not reach the Temple Courtyard until the time for the offering of the sacrifice passed, he is considered as having been held back by forces beyond his control, but not "on a distant way."<br>If someone was imprisoned outside the walls of Jerusalem and was promised to be released in the evening, the offering may be slaughtered on his behalf and when he is released in the evening, he may partake of it.<br>When does the above apply? When he was imprisoned by Jews. If, by contrast, he was imprisoned by gentiles, the Paschal sacrifice should not be slaughtered on his behalf until he is released. If, however, it was slaughtered on his behalf and he was released, he may partake of it. If he was not released, he is exempt from bringing a second Paschal sacrifice, since the sacrifice was slaughtered on his behalf.<br>Similar laws apply when a Paschal sacrifice was slaughtered for a person in the acute state of <i>onain</i> mourning, for an invalid, or for an elderly person who could have partaken of the sacrifice who became impure after the blood was poured on the altar and thus they are no longer able to partake of it. They are exempt from offering the second Paschal sacrifice.

Chapter 6

Which impure individuals are prevented from offering until the second Pesach? Anyone who cannot partake of the Paschal sacrifice on the fifteenth of Nisan because of his impurity, e.g., <i>zavim</i>, <i>zavot</i>, <i>niddot</i>, women impure because of childbirth, and those who were intimate with a women in the <i>niddah</i> state. By contrast, those who are impure because they touched an animal corpse, a dead crawling animal, and the like on the day of the fourteenth of Nisan, should immerse themselves and the Paschal sacrifice should be sacrificed on their behalf after they immerse themselves. In the evening, when the day of their impurity is concluded, they may partake of the Paschal sacrifice.
When the seventh day of the purification process of one who is impure because of contact with a human corpse falls on the fourteenth of Nisan - even though he has immersed himself and had the ashes of the red heifer sprinkled upon him and thus he is fit to partake of sacrificial foods in the evening - the Paschal sacrifice should not be slaughtered for him. His offering is postponed until the second Pesach. This is derived from Numbers 9:6 "And the men who were impure because of a human corpse and were not able to offer the Paschal sacrifice on that day." According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught that this occurred on the seventh day of their purification process. This is what they were asking: Should the Paschal sacrifice be slaughtered for them and they would partake of it in the evening? Moses explained to them that it should not be slaughtered for them.<br>When does the above apply? When one became impure because of one of the types of impurity for which a Nazirite would be required to shave. If, however, one became impure because of other types of impurity resulting from contact with a corpse for which a Nazirite is not required to shave, the Paschal sacrifice may be slaughtered for him on the seventh day of his purification process after he immersed himself and had the ashes of the red heifer sprinkled upon him. In the evening, when the day of his impurity is concluded, he may partake of the Paschal sacrifice.
When a <i>zav</i> experiences two discharges and then counts seven clean days and immerses on the seventh day, the Paschal sacrifice may be sacrificed on his behalf and he may partake of it in the evening. If he experienced a <i>zav</i> discharge after the blood was cast on the altar, he is exempt from bringing the second Paschal sacrifice.<br>Similarly, a woman who is watching a day because of a discharge on the previous day may immerse on the day she is watching, as explained in the laws of forbidden relations. The Paschal sacrifice may be slaughtered on her behalf and she may partake of it in the evening. If she experiences uterine bleeding after the blood of the Paschal sacrifice was cast on the altar, she is exempt from bringing the second Paschal sacrifice.<br>A Paschal sacrifice is not slaughtered on behalf of a woman who is impure because of menstrual bleeding on her seventh day of impurity. For she may not immerse herself until the night of the eighth day and she is not fit to partake of sacrificial meat until the night of the ninth day.
When the day when one of those requiring atonement may bring his sacrifice falls on the fourteenth of Nisan, one may slaughter the Paschal sacrifice on their behalf. Their sacrifices may be offered on the fourteenth of Nisan, whether before the Paschal sacrifice is slaughtered or afterwards. They may partake of their Paschal sacrifices in the evening.<br>We do not slaughter the Paschal sacrifice on their behalf until they entrust their sacrifices required to regain purity to the court, lest they be negligent and fail to offer them.
When the eighth day of the purification process of a person suffering from <i>tzara'at</i> falls on the fourteenth of Nissan, but he experiences a seminal emission that day, he may immerse himself, enter the Women's Courtyard, and bring his sacrifices. Although a person who immersed on a particular day is forbidden from entering the Temple Courtyard that day, as was explained in <i>Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash</i>, since this is the day that the Paschal sacrifice is to be offered at its appointed time, a positive commandment whose omission is punishable by <i>karet</i> comes and supersedes a Rabbinic commandment.
When the seventh day of the purification process of one who became impure due to contact with a human corpse falls on the Sabbath, the ashes of the Red Heifer are not sprinkled upon him until the following day. Even if his seventh day falls on the thirteenth of Nisan which is a Sabbath, the sprinkling of the ashes should be postponed until the fourteenth. The ashes should be sprinkled upon him, but the Paschal sacrifice should not be slaughtered on his behalf, as we explained. Instead, his offering is postponed and he brings the second Paschal sacrifice.<br>One might argue: The prohibition against sprinkling the ashes on the Sabbath was instituted as a <i>shvut</i> and the failure to bring the Paschal sacrifice is punishable by <i>karet</i>. How then could the Sages uphold their prohibition in the face of a prohibition punishable by <i>karet</i>? In resolution, it can be explained that the day on which he is forbidden to have the ashes sprinkled upon him is not the time when the sacrifice punishable by <i>karet</i> is obligated to be brought. Therefore they upheld their words as instituted, even though this matter will lead to it having to stand in a place punishable by <i>karet</i>.
When an uncircumcised Jew circumcises himself on the day before Pesach, the Paschal sacrifice may be slaughtered on his behalf after his circumcision. The Paschal sacrifice should not, by contrast, be slaughtered on behalf of a convert who converted on the fourteenth of Nisan and circumcised himself and immersed in a <i>mikveh</i>, for he may not partake of the sacrifice in the evening. He is like one who departs from a grave who requires seven days of purification and then can he become pure. This is a decree lest this convert become impure due to contact with a corpse in the following year on the fourteenth of Nisan and immerse himself and seek to partake of the Paschal sacrifice in the evening, saying: "Last year, the Jews did this for me, when I circumcised myself and immersed, and partook of the Paschal sacrifice in the evening."<br>Behold, this decree is of Rabbinic origin and the failure to bring the Paschal sacrifice is punishable by <i>karet</i>. How then could the Sages uphold their prohibition in the face of a prohibition punishable by <i>karet</i> on the day of the sacrifice which is the fourteenth of Nisan? The rationale is that the convert is not obligated in the observance of mitzvot until he circumcises himself and immerses himself in a <i>mikveh</i>. He should not immerse himself until he becomes healed from the circumcision, as we explained with regard to the concept of conversion. Therefore they upheld their words in this instance, because this person who circumcised himself should not have immersed until he was healed. Thus he would not have incurred an obligation to bring the Paschal sacrifice at all.
If a person came through a <i>beit hapras</i>, he should proceed and sift, proceed and sift. If he did not find a bone and did not contract impurity, he should slaughter and partake of his Paschal sacrifice, even though he walked in a <i>beit hapras</i>. The rationale is that the impurity of a <i>beit hapras</i> is a Rabbinic institution, as will be explained in <i>Hilchot Tum'at Meit</i>, and the Sages did not uphold their decree in the face of an obligation punishable by <i>karet</i>, as we explained. Similarly, a <i>beit hapras</i> that was trod upon is pure with regard to bringing a Paschal sacrifice.
A person in the acute state of <i>onein</i> mourning is fit to partake of the Paschal sacrifice in the evening. The rationale is that the restrictions of <i>aninut</i> at night are Rabbinic in origin and our Sages did not uphold their decree in the face of an obligation punishable by <i>karet</i>. Instead, the Paschal sacrifice should be slaughtered on his behalf. He must immerse and afterwards partake of it. The immersion is necessary so that he makes a distinction from the state of <i>aninut</i> and does not divert his attention.<br>When does the above apply? When the deceased for whom he must mourn passes away after midday on the fourteenth of Nisan and thus he was already obligated to bring the Paschal sacrifice. If, however, the deceased passed away before midday, the Paschal sacrifice should not be slaughtered on his behalf. Instead, his offering is postponed until the second Pesach. If, however, the Paschal sacrifice was slaughtered on his behalf and the blood poured on the altar, he should immerse himself and partake of it in the evening.<br>If the deceased relative passed away on the thirteenth of Nisan and was buried on the fourteenth, on the day of the burial, he must observe <i>aninut</i> according to Rabbinic decree and that decree does not encompass the night following the fourteenth. Therefore one may slaughter the Paschal sacrifice on his behalf. He should immerse and partake of it and other sacrifices in the evening. The day when one hears of a close relative's death and the day when one gathers the bones of one's dead is equivalent to the day of burial. Therefore if one had the bones of his dead gathered on the fourteenth of Nisan or heard that a close relative died, the Paschal sacrifice may be slaughtered on his behalf. He immerses himself and may partake of sacrificial food in the evening.
When a person is digging in a mound from an avalanche in search of the body of a deceased person, the Paschal sacrifice should not be slaughtered on his behalf, lest he find a corpse in the mound and he be impure at the time of slaughter. If the Paschal sacrifice was slaughtered on his behalf and a corpse was not found, he may partake of the sacrifice in the evening.<br>The following rules apply if the corpse was discovered after the blood was poured on the altar. If it became known to him that he was certainly impure at the time the blood was poured, e.g., the mound was round, he is obligated in the second Paschal sacrifice. If the matter is in doubt, i.e., maybe he was not standing over the impurity at the time the blood was poured and did not become impure until afterwards, he is exempt from the second Paschal sacrifice.
The following rules apply when a person journeyed on a road and later a corpse was discovered lying across the width of the road. If the corpse could be deemed as the impurity likened to the depths, even though the person is considered as impure with regard to <i>terumah</i>, he is considered as pure with regard to the Paschal sacrifice. He may slaughter and partake of the Paschal sacrifice even though it is possible that he touched the corpse. Since the impurity is likened to the depths, he is pure with regard to the Paschal sacrifice. Even though the corpse is intact and extends from one end of the path to the other, he may offer his Paschal sacrifice unless he knows with certainty that he became impure because of it.<br>When does the above apply? When he was walking on foot, for it is possible that he did not touch it. If, however, he was riding on a beast or carrying a burden, he is impure even though it is impurity likened to the depths, for it is impossible that he will not have touched, moved, or stood over the corpse. We have already explained impurity likened to the depths in <i>Hilchot Nizirut</i>.
When a person offered the Paschal sacrifice under the presumption that he was pure and afterwards, it was discovered that he was impure due to impurity likened to the depths, he is not obligated in the second Paschal sacrifice. This is a law conveyed by the Oral Tradition. If, however, it becomes known to him that he was impure due to impurity that was known, he is obligated in the second Paschal sacrifice.
When a person contracted impurity from a human corpse and had the ashes of the red heifer sprinkled upon him on the third and seventh day [as required], but on his seventh day he unknowingly became impure because of a grave "likened to the depths" and brought a Paschal sacrifice under the presumption that he was pure and afterwards, he discovered that he had contracted the impurity "likened to the depths," he is not obligated in the second Paschal sacrifice, for once he immersed himself on the seventh day, his initial impurity ceased. If, however, he had contracted the impurity "likened to the depths" on the sixth day of his impurity and without knowing, he brought a Paschal sacrifice, he is obligated in the second Paschal sacrifice. The rationale is that a person who is impure must operate under the presumption that he is impure until he has definitely become pure, because there is a basis for the presumption of his impurity.

Chapter 7

The following rules apply when there were many individuals who were ritually impure due to contact with a human corpse on the first Pesach. If they were the lesser portion of the Jewish people, their offering is postponed to the second Pesach like other impure individuals. If, however, the majority of the Jewish people were impure due to contact with a human corpse or the priests or the sacred utensils were impure due to contact with a human corpse, their offering is not postponed. Instead, they should all offer the Paschal sacrifice in a state of ritual impurity, those ritually impure together with those who are pure.<br>This is derived from Numbers 9:6 which states: "And the men who were impure because of contact with the corpse of a human soul." Implied is that the offerings of individuals are postponed until the second Pesach, but those of the community are not postponed. This concept applies only with regard to the ritual impurity associated with a human corpse, as explained in <i>Hilchot Bi'at HaMikdash</i>.
If the Jewish people were half ritually pure and half impure, they should all offer the sacrifice on the first Pesach. Those who are pure offer the sacrifice by themselves in a state of ritual purity and those who are impure offer it by themselves in a state of impurity and partake of it in impurity. If the impure outnumbered the pure even by one, they should all offer it in impurity.
If the men were half impure due to contact with a human corpse and half pure and when you count the women together with the men, the majority will be pure, those who are pure should offer the first Paschal sacrifice. Those who are impure do not bring neither the first Paschal sacrifice or the second. They do not bring the first, because they are the lesser portion of the people. And they do not bring the second, because the women's offering of the second Paschal sacrifice is a matter of choice. Thus the impure persons are merely half the people and half the people do not bring the second Paschal sacrifice.
If the majority of the Jewish people were <i>zavim</i>, afflicted by <i>tzara'at</i>, or had relationships with <i>niddot</i> and the lesser portion were impure due to contact with a human corpse, those impure because of contact with a corpse should not offer the first Paschal sacrifice, because they are the lesser portion of the people. Nor do they offer the second, because individuals do not bring the second except at the time the majority of the people offered the first Paschal sacrifice. In this instance, since the majority of the Jewish people did not offer the first Paschal sacrifice, the lesser portion who are impure because of contact with a corpse should not bring the second Paschal sacrifice.
If the majority of the Jewish people were impure because of contact with a human corpse and a lesser portion were <i>zavim</i> and the like, those who are impure because of contact with a corpse offer the first Paschal sacrifice, and those who are <i>zavim</i> and the like do not offer either the first Paschal sacrifice or the second. They do not offer the first, because the restrictions against offering in a state of impurity were suspended with regard to communal offerings only for those impure due to contact with a human corpse. Nor do they bring the second, because a second Paschal sacrifice is brought only when the first was brought in a state of ritual purity. If the first was brought in a state of impurity, there is no second offering.
The following laws apply when a third of the Jewish people were pure, a third were <i>zavim</i> and the like, and a third were impure because of contact with a human corpse. Those who were impure because of contact with a corpse should not offer the first Paschal sacrifice, nor the second. They do not offer the first, because they are the lesser portion when compared to the aggregate of those who are pure and the <i>zavvim</i>. They should not offer the second, because the lesser portion of the people offered the first, as we explained.<br>How do we calculate whether the majority of the people are impure or pure? We do not make a calculation of all those who seek to partake of it, because it is possible that 20 people will be enumerated on one Paschal sacrifice and they will send it with one person to slaughter it on their behalf. Instead, we calculate all of those who seek to enter the Temple Courtyard while they are outside. Before the first group enters the Temple Courtyard, the calculation is made.
When an individual becomes impure because of a questionable situation regarding ritual impurity in a private domain, as will be explained in the appropriate place, his offering is postponed until the second Pesach. When the majority of the Jewish people become impure because of a questionable situation in a private domain, they should all offer it in a state of impurity.
When the Paschal sacrifice was offered in a state of impurity, it should also be eaten in a state of impurity, for from the outset, it was brought only to be eaten. It may not be eaten by all those who are impure, only by those impure because of contact with a human corpse. For them, this impurity is suspended. This also applies to those impure because of contact with other sources of impurity.<br>Those who are impure because of an impurity that results from a physical condition, e.g., <i>zavvim, zavot, niddot,</i> women after childbirth, those afflicted by <i>tzara'at,</i> should not partake of it. If, however, they do partake of it, they are exempt. According to the Oral Tradition, we learned that when a sacrifice is eaten by those who are pure, those who are impure are liable for partaking of it in impurity. When it is eaten by those who are impure, there is no liability for partaking of it in impurity. Even if those who are impure because of contact with a human corpse partook of the fats and organs to be offered on the altar, they are exempt.<br>When does the statement that a Paschal sacrifice may be eaten while ritually impure apply? When the people became impure before the blood was poured on the altar. If, however, they became impure after the blood was poured, it should not be eaten.
If the Paschal sacrifice was slaughtered in a state of ritual purity and the majority of the Jewish people became impure before its blood was poured on the altar, the blood should be poured on the altar, but the Paschal sacrifice should not be eaten. This is a Rabbinical decree lest the majority of the people become impure after the blood was poured in a following year and it be eaten in a state of impurity.<br>The following rules apply if the sacred utensils were impure because of [contact with a dead crawling animal or the like. Although the sacred utensils do not cause the persons to become impure, as will be explained in the appropriate place, since they cause the meat to become impure, the Paschal sacrifice should only be brought by those who are pure and it should be eaten, even though it is impure. It is preferable that it be eaten when the meat is impure thus superseding only an ordinary negative prohibition than it be eaten by individuals whose bodies are impure. That would be a prohibition punishable by <i>karet</i>, as explained in <i>Hilchot Pesulei HaMukdashim</i>.

Chapter 8

Partaking of the meat of the Paschal sacrifice on the night of the fifteenth of Nisan is a positive commandment, as Exodus 12:8 states: "And you shall eat the meat on this night, roasted on the fire. With <i>matzot</i> and bitter herbs shall you eat it."
<i>Matzah</i> and bitter herbs are not indispensable elements of the mitzvah. If one did not find <i>matzah</i> or bitter herbs, he fulfills his obligation by eating the meat of the Paschal sacrifice alone. There is no mitzvah to partake of bitter herbs without the Paschal sacrifice, as implied by Numbers 9:11: "Eat it with <i>matzot</i> and bitter herbs."
The optimum manner of performing the mitzvah is to partake of the Paschal sacrifice in a manner leading to satiation. Therefore if one sacrificed festive peace-offerings on the fourteenth of Nisan, one should partake of them first and then partake of the meat of the Paschal sacrifice to be satiated from the festive offering. Even if one does not eat more than an olive-size portion, he fulfills his obligation.<br>Similarly, partaking of the second Paschal sacrifice on the fifteenth of the month of Iyar is a positive commandment, as stated: "Eat it with <i>matzot</i> and bitter herbs."
Both of them are eaten only roasted with fire. One who partakes of an olive-sized portion from their meat lightly-roasted or cooked in liquid on the nights of Pesach is liable for lashes, as Exodus 12:9 states: "Do not partake of it lightly-roasted or cooked in water." If one partook of a Paschal sacrifice that was both lightly-roasted and cooked, he is liable for only one set of lashes, because both these forbidden activities are included in one prohibition.<br>If, before nightfall, one partakes of a Paschal sacrifice that was lightly-roasted or cooked, he is not liable for lashes, as can be inferred ffrom the continuation of the above verse: "except roasted in fire." Implied is that at the time it is a mitzvah to partake of the sacrifice roasted, one is liable for partaking of it lightly-roasted or cooked. If one partook of a sacrifice prepared in this manner while it was still day, he is exempt.
If one partook of an olive-sized portion of a roasted Paschal sacrifice while it is still day, he violates a positive commandment, as Exodus 12:8 states: "And they shall eat the meat on that night," i.e., at night and not during the day. A prohibition resulting from a positive commandment is considered as a positive commandment.
The term <i>na</i> which the Torah mentioned in its prohibition refers to meat which began to be subjected to fire. It became roasted slightly, but was not yet fit for human consumption. If, however, one partakes of the meat of the Paschal sacrifice while raw, he is not liable for lashes, but he did nullify a positive commandment, for it is written: "roasted with fire." Implied is that if it is not roasted, it is prohibited.<br>If one roasted it to the full extent until it became charred, he is exempt.
The term "cooked" which the Torah mentioned in its prohibition refers to cooking the meat in water, other liquids, or fruit juice. The use of the phrase <i>bashail mevushal</i> by Exodus 12:9 includes all types of cooking.
If one roasted it and afterwards cooked it, cooked it and afterwards, roasted it, or pot-roasted it, and partook of it, he is liable. It is, however, permitted to baste it with wine, oil, honey, all other liquids, and fruit juice — except water. After it is roasted, it is permitted to dip the meat in liquids and in fruit juice.
One may not roast the Paschal sacrifice on a stoneware utensil or a metal utensil, for it is written: "roasted with fire," i.e., and not roasted by anything else. Therefore if the utensil was perforated so that the fire could affect the meat, one may roast with it. One may not roast it with a metal spit, because the entire spit will be hot and will roast the meat where it touches it.
When one kindles an oven, removes all the fire, and then hangs the Paschal sacrifice in the oven and roasts it, it is forbidden to partake of it, because this is not "roasted with fire." If the sacrificial animal was cut up and hung over coals, it is considered "roasted with fire." If he roasted it over lime, clay, or the hot springs of Tiberias, it is forbidden, because this is not "roasted with fire."<br>How is the animal offered as a Paschal sacrifice roasted? One pierces it from its mouth until its anus with a wooden spit and hangs it in an oven with the fire beneath it.. One hangs its legs and its intestines in the oven, outside of it. One should not place them inside of its body cavity, for this is comparable to cooking. They would choose a pomegranate spit to roast it so that it will not cast its sap into the meat and cook it.
If the meat touches the earthenware sides or floor of the oven, one should skin off that place, because it is roasted because of the earthenware.
If its juices drip on the earthenware and then return to it, that place should be cut off. For any juice and liquid which it emits while being roasted is forbidden, for it is not roasted meat.
If its juices drip on flour, he should take a handful from the place the juice fell and discard it.
The following laws apply if one applied oil that is <i>terumah</i> to the Paschal sacrifice. If the company was made up of priests, they should partake of it. If the company was made up of Israelites and the meat is still raw, it should be washed and dried and then it may be roasted. If it has been roasted, the outer portion should be skinned off.<br>If oil from the second tithe was applied to it, one should not charge the other members of the company for its value, for the second tithe should not be redeemed in Jerusalem, as explained in the appropriate place.<br>We do not roast two Paschal sacrifices together lest they become intermingled. This applies even to a goat and a lamb.
We already stated in several places that the Paschal sacrifice should be eaten only until midnight to distance a person from transgression. According to Scriptural Law, one may partake of it throughout the entire night until dawn.<br>We already explained in <i>Hilchot Chametz UMatzah</i> that the Paschal sacrifice requires the recitation of <i>Hallel</i> during the time that it is being eaten and that the members of the company do not partake of the meat after they fell asleep, even if they did so at the beginning of the night.

Chapter 9

Anyone who partakes of a Paschal sacrifice may partake of it only in one company. It may not be removed from the company to partake of it. If one removes an olive-sized portion of meat from a Paschal sacrifice from one company to another company on the night of the fifteenth of Nisan, he is liable for lashes, as Exodus 12:46 states: "Do not remove the meat from the house to the outside, "for that prooftext uses a form of the word <i>hotza'ah</i> which is used with regard to the Sabbath. Therefore it is necessary that one remove the article from its initial place and place it down outside, as is true with regard to the prohibition against transferring an article from one domain to another on the Sabbath.<br>With regard to the Paschal sacrifice, one is not liable for removing meat from a company after it has already been removed once. Instead, since it was removed by the first person, it is disqualified.<br>From the doorframe of a house inward is considered as part of the house. From the doorframe outward, is considered as outside the house. The doorframe, i.e., the width of the entrance, is considered as outside. The windows and the width of the walls are considered as inside. The roofs and the lofts are not considered as part of the house.
When the meat of a Paschal sacrifice has been removed from its company - whether intentionally or inadvertently - it becomes forbidden to be eaten. It is comparable to the meat of sacrifices of the most sacred order that were taken outside the Temple Courtyard or sacrifices of a lesser degree of sanctity that were taken outside the walls of Jerusalem, in which instance, everything is considered like an animal that is <i>treifah</i>. One is liable for lashes for partaking of it, as stated in <i>Hilchot Ma'aseh HaKorbanot</i>.<br>When part of a limb of a sacrificial animal is removed from its designated area, one should cut through the meat, descending until he reaches the bone and then scrape off the meat. Whatever is within the designated area should be eaten. Whatever is outside should be burnt. When he reaches the bone, he should cut off the bone with a butcher's knife, if other sacrifices are involved. If it is a Paschal sacrifice - in which instance it is forbidden to break its bones, one should scrape off the meat until the joint, separate the limb whose portion was removed from the joint, and cast it outside.
When two companies are partaking of their Paschal sacrifices in one house, each company must delineate its borders with a partition. From the words "from the meat... outside," the Oral Tradition taught that the place outside the place where it is being eaten must be designated. Thus one company must turn their faces to one side and eat and the other must turn their faces to the other side and eat, so they will not appear as intermingled.
If the water with which they would mix their wines was in the center of the house, between the two companies, when the attendant rises to pour water, he should shut his mouth closed and then turn his face away from his company, keeping it closed until he returns to them. Only afterwards may he swallow what is in his mouth, for it is forbidden to partake of the Paschal sacrifice in two companies.<br>A bride is permitted to turn her face away from the company and partake of the Paschal sacrifice, because she is embarrassed to eat in their presence.
When the divider between two companies has been undone, they should not partake of their Paschal sacrifices. Similarly, if one company was partaking of a Paschal sacrifice and a divider was made separating some from the others, they should not partake of it until the divider is removed. The rationale is that a Paschal sacrifice may not be eaten in two companies and one should not move from one company to another.
The following rules apply when three or more members of a company come to partake of their Paschal sacrifice, but the other members of the company do not come. If they entered at the time most people partake of their Paschal sacrifices and the attendant called for the others and they did not come, they may enter and eat until satiation without waiting for the others. Even if those who came late come and see that the three consumed the entire sacrifice, they need not reimburse them for their portion. If, however, only two enter on time, they should wait.<br>When does this apply? When they enter to eat. When, however, they depart, no one has to wait for his colleague. Even if only one person finished eating, he may depart. He need not wait for the others.
One who gives an olive-sized portion of a Paschal sacrifice - whether the first Paschal sacrifice or the second - to an apostate who worships false deities, to a resident alien, or a gentile worker, violates a negative commandment, but is not liable for lashes. He is, however, liable for stripes for rebellious conduct.<br>The term "foreigner" mentioned in the Torah refers to one who worships alien deities. One may not give a portion of the Paschal sacrifice to a gentile, even a resident alien or a worker, as Exodus 12:45 states: "Neither a resident, nor an alien should partake of it."
An uncircumcised person who ate an olive-sized portion of the Paschal sacrifice is liable for lashes, as <i>ibid.</i>:48 states: "No uncircumcised person shall partake of it." That verse can also be interpreted as meaning: He may not partake "of it"; he may, however, partake of <i>matzah</i> and bitter herbs. Similarly, it is permitted to feed <i>matzah</i> and bitter herbs to a resident alien, or a gentile worker.
Just as the circumcision of one's sons and servants holds one back from slaughtering the Paschal sacrifice, so too, it holds him back from partaking of it, as <i>ibid.</i>:44 states: "He shall circumcise him, then he shall partake of it."<br>What is implied? One purchased a servant after the slaughter of the Paschal sacrifice or one had a son whose time for circumcision did not arrive until after the slaughter of the Paschal sacrifice. Such a person is forbidden to partake of the Paschal sacrifice until he circumcises them.<br>How is it possible for the son to be fit to be circumcised after the slaughter of the Paschal sacrifice, but not to be fit to be circumcised before its slaughtered? For example, he had a fever and seven full days are needed from the time at which he became healed, his eye hurt severely and he was healed after the slaughter of the Paschal sacrifice, or he was a <i>tumtum</i> and he was operated on after the slaughter of the Paschal sacrifice and it was discovered that he was male.

Chapter 10

A person who breaks a bone in a pure Paschal sacrifice is liable for lashes, as Exodus 12:46 states: "You shall not break a bone in it." And with regard to the second Paschal sacrifice, Numbers 9:12 states: "He shall not break a bone in it."<br>When, however, the Paschal sacrifice is brought in a state of impurity, one is not liable for lashes. According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught: "You shall not break in it," i.e., in a pure sacrifice, not an impure one.<br>Whether one breaks a bone of the Paschal sacrifice on the night of the fifteenth of Nisan, while it is still day on the fourteenth, or even after several days, he is liable for lashes.
For this reason, the bones of the Paschal sacrifice are burnt with the remainder of its meat so that they will not cause misfortune.
One is liable only for breaking a bone upon which there was an olive-sized portion of meat or which contains marrow. If, by contrast, a bone does not contain marrow and there is not an olive-sized portion of meat upon it, one is not liable for breaking it. If there was an olive-sized portion of meat on a bone, but one broke it in a place where there is no meat, he is liable, even though there is no meat where he broke the bone.
When one breaks a bone that is already broken, he is liable for lashes.
When one burns the bones of a Paschal sacrifice or cuts its sinews, he is not liable for breaking a bone.
When a Paschal sacrifice was lightly roasted or cooked and one broke a bone, he is liable for lashes. Even if it was disqualified because it contracted impurity, it was taken out of the home where it is being eaten, or the like, the prohibition against breaking its bones applies.<br>When does the above apply? When there was a time the Paschal sacrifice was acceptable and it was disqualified. If, however, there was never a time when it was acceptable, e.g., it became <i>piggul</i> or was brought with a disqualifying intent concerning time or with a disqualifying intent concerning the type of sacrifice, the prohibition against breaking a bone does not apply.
If one breaks the bone of the fat-tail, he is not liable, because it is not fit to be eaten.
Cartilage which is like soft bones are permitted to be eaten.
If the Paschal sacrifice was a small and tender kid goat whose bones are soft, they may not be eaten, because that is considered as breaking a bone. If one partakes of them he is liable for lashes, for the liability applies equally whether one breaks a firm bone or a soft bone,<br>This is the general principle: Whatever could be eaten in a large ox after it has been cooked may be eaten in a tender kid after it has been roasted, e.g., the cartilage around the joints and similar types of body tissue.
Soft sinews that will ultimately become firm, even though they are fit to be eaten at the time and may be eaten from the Paschal sacrifice, they are not considered when enumerating people on the sacrifice. Persons may be enumerated because of the brain in the head, because it is possible to remove it without breaking a bone. One may not be enumerated on the marrow in the hip bone - it is bone closed on both sides - because it is impossible to remove the marrow without breaking a bone.
When a person partakes of the Paschal sacrifice, he should cut off the meat and partake of it. He may cut off the bones at the joints and separate them if he desires.<br>When he reaches the sciatic nerve, he should remove it and place it with the remainder of sinews, bones, and membranes which are removed at the time of eating. It is not removed previously, as is done with regard to other meat.<br>The Paschal sacrifice should not be cut into pieces before it is roasted. Instead, it is roasted whole. If it was cut into pieces, it is acceptable, provided it is not lacking a limb.<br>A person should endeavor that none of the meat of the Paschal sacrifice remain until the morning, as Exodus 12:10 states: "Do not leave over any of it until the morning." Similarly, with regard to the second Paschal sacrifice, Exodus 12:10 states: "What remains from it, you shall burn in fire."
When the first Paschal sacrifice is offered, a peace-offering is sacrificed with it on the fourteenth of Nissan from cattle or from sheep, whether a large animal or a small one, like all other peace-offerings. It is called the festive-offering of the fourteenth. This is the intent of the Torah's statement Deuteronomy 16:2: "And you bring a Paschal offering to God your Lord from sheep and from cattle."<br>When is this festive-offering brought? When the Paschal sacrifice is offered during the week, in a state of ritual purity, and when there is a lack of Paschal sacrifices. If, however, the fourteenth of Nisan falls on the Sabbath, it is offered in a state of ritual impurity, or there are ample offerings, the festive-offering is not brought with it. Instead, only the Paschal sacrifices are brought.
The festive-offering brought on the fourteenth is a voluntary matter; it is not an obligation. It may be eaten for two days and one night like all other peace-offerings. It is forbidden to leave over the meat of the festive-offering of the fourteenth until the third day, as Deuteronomy 16:4 states: "Do not leave any of the meat that you will sacrifice in the evening for the first day until the morning." According to the Oral Tradition, it was taught that this is a warning for a person who leaves over the meat of the festive-offering of the fourteenth until the sixteenth. The term "until the morning" means until the morning of the second day. One who leaves over the meat is not liable for lashes. Instead, he should burn the left over meat in the same manner as meat left over from other sacrifices is burnt.
The meat of the festive-offering that was served on the table with the Paschal sacrifice and similarly, the other cooked dishes served with it should be burnt with it. They may only be eaten until midnight like the Paschal sacrifice itself. This is a decree lest a mixture occur.
What are the differences between the first Paschal sacrifice and the second Paschal sacrifice? At the time of the first, <i>chametz</i> is forbidden to be seen or possessed in one's domain. It may not be slaughtered while one is in possession of <i>chametz</i>. Its meat may not be removed from the company in which it was designated to be eaten. The <i>Hallel</i> must be recited when it is eaten. A festive-offering is brought with it. It may be brought in a state of impurity if the majority of the people are impure because of contact with a human corpse, as we explained.<br>With regard to the second Paschal sacrifice, by contrast, both <i>chametz</i> and <i>matzah</i> may be possessed by the person at home. <i>Hallel</i> is not recited while partaking of it. It may be taken out of the company in which it was designated to be eaten. A festive-offering is not brought with it and it may not be brought in a state of impurity.<br>Both are alike in that offering them supersedes the Sabbath prohibitions. <i>Hallel</i> is recited when they are offered. They are eaten roasted in one house together with matzah and bitter herbs. In neither instance may their meat be left over until the next morning, nor may their bones be broken.<br>Why does the second Paschal sacrifice not resemble the first in all matters, as might be expected since Numbers 9:12 states with regard to the second Paschal sacrifice: "It shall be offered according to all the statutes of the Paschal sacrifice"? Because some of the statutes of the Paschal sacrifice are explicitly mentioned with regard to it. This teaches that it is analogous to the first only in those matters which are stated explicitly regarding it. They are the mitzvot that concern the body of the sacrifice. They are "the statutes of the Paschal sacrifice" included in the general category.<br>The statements regarding the offering of the Paschal sacrifice in Egypt: that it should be set aside on the tenth of the month, that its blood should be applied to the lintel and the two doorposts with a bunch of hyssop, and that it should be eaten with haste, are not practices that are followed in future generations. They were observed only with regard to the Paschal sacrifice offered in Egypt.