Mishneh Torah, Eruvin
משנה תורה, הלכות עירובין
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Eruvin



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8








One who makes an eiruv techumin (the placing of food in a location to extend the area to which one is permitted to walk on the Sabbath, a holiday, or the Day of Atonement) for a two-day holiday in the Diaspora or for the Sabbath and [an adjacent] holiday, although it is one eiruv in one direction for both days, the eiruv-food must be in its place on the first night and the second night for the entire period between sundown and nightfall. What does he do? He brings the eiruv-food on the eve of the holiday or of the Sabbath and waits with it until dark and takes it with him if it is the night of a holiday (on which carrying is permitted in certain circumstances). The next day, he takes it to the same place and leaves it there until nightfall and eats it if it is the Sabbath or takes it with him if it is a holiday. This is because the Sabbath and the holiday are two [separate] periods of holiness and are not considered to be one day; therefore, we are not able to say that the eiruv works from the first day for both days.
If the eiruv-food was eaten on the first day, the eiruv was acquired for the first day, and there is no eiruv for the second day. If he made the eiruv with his feet on the first day, he must make it with his feet on the second day, this being walking to the place and standing there, thinking that he should acquire a place of rest there [such that the place where he is standing will be considered his place so he can walk 2000 cubits in any direction from that place]. If he made the eiruv with bread on the first day, and he makes it with his feet the second day, it is an acceptable eiruv. If he wants to make the eiruv with bread [the second day], he must use the same bread that he used for the eiruv the first day.
If the Day of Atonement falls on the evening of the Sabbath or the night following the Sabbath during the time that the months were decided on the basis of people witnessing the new moon, it seems to me that they are considered to be one day and one period of holiness.
This that we said that he can make two eiruvs in two directions for two days [of a holiday] is only if he is able to get to each of the two eiruv-foods on the first day. But if he is unable to get to the eiruv-food for the second day on the first day, the second eiruv is not an eiruv. [This is] because the commandment of the eiruv-food is that it should be able to be eaten as a meal while it is still [the] day [i.e. not the night, of the Sabbath or holiday], and in this case, because he can not get to the second eiruv-food on the first day, it is not fit for eating while it is still day.
How so? If he left the eiruv-food 2000 cubits to the east of his house and designated it for the first day and left another eiruv-food 1, 100, or 1000 cubits west [of his house], this second eiruv is not an eiruv. For behold, on the first day, the second eiruv-food was not fitting for him while it was still day because he was not able to get to it because he could not walk to the west of his house at all [because the eiruv-food of the first day established his rest place 2000 cubits east of his house so the farthest west he could have walked was his house].
But if he left his eiruv-food 1500 cubits east of his house and designated it for the first day and left a second eiruv-food no more than 500 cubits west of his house and designated it for the second day, it is an eiruv. [This is] because he is able to get to it on the first day.
[In the case of] a holiday that falls on the eve of the Sabbath, he may not make an eiruv chatzeirot [to permit carrying within a courtyard] or eiruv techumin [to permit walking beyond 2000 cubits from his house]; instead, he makes it on Thursday, which is the eve of the holiday. And if the two days of a holiday in the Diaspora fell on Thursday and the eve of the Sabbath, he can make an eiruv chatzeirot and eiruv techumin on Wednesday. If he forgot and did not make an eiruv [then], he can make an eiruv chatzeirot on Thursday and stipulate a condition [see below], but not an eiruv techumin. 
How does he stipulate a condition? He says on Thursday, 'If today is the holiday, my words [making an eiruv] lack substance and if it is not [a holiday], this is an eiruv.' The next day, he makes an eiruv again and says, 'If today is the holiday, I already made an eiruv yesterday, and my words lack substance, and if yesterday was the holiday, it is an eiruv.' When does this apply? On the two days of a holiday in the Diaspora, but the two days of the New Year are considered as one day, and he may make an eiruv only on the eve of the holiday.
