Marbeh Lisaper on Haggadah
הגדה של פסח
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Marbeh_Lisaper_on_Haggadah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Rabbi Mark Greenspan
- www.oceansidejewishcenter.org

Section 1



Section 2



Section 3



Section 4



Section 5



Line 1



Line 2



Line 3



Line 4



Line 5



Line 6



Line 7



Line 8



Line 9



Line 10



Line 11



Line 12



Line 13



Line 14



Line 15



Line 16



Line 17



Line 18



Line 19



Line 20



Line 21



Line 22



Line 23



Line 24



Line 25



Line 26



Line 27



Line 28



Line 29



Line 30



Line 31



Line 32



Line 33



Line 34



Line 35



Line 36



Line 37



Line 38



Line 39



Line 40



Line 41



Line 42



Line 43



Line 44



Line 45



Line 46



Line 47



Line 48



Line 49



Line 50



Line 51



Line 52



Line 53



Line 54



Line 55



Line 56



Line 57



Line 58



Line 59



Line 60



Line 61



Line 62



Line 63



Line 64



Line 65



Line 66



Line 67



Line 68



Line 69



Line 70



Line 71



Line 72



Line 73



Line 74



Line 75



Line 76



Line 77



Line 78



Line 79



Line 80



Line 81

Rabban Gamliel used to say: This is the proper version of the text, similar to the one that is found in the Mishnah. It implies that it was Rabban Gamliel’s practice to make this statement on Passover night. The other version which says, “Rabban Gamliel says…” implies that there were those who disagreed with Rabban Gamliel in this matter.  Rabban Gamliel believed that one must explain the Seder customs based on the verse: “No, the thing shall be close to you, in your mouth and in your heart, to observe it.”  This verse teaches us that when the matter is explained in your mouth it will also be in your heart. The statement is then followed by, “Each person is obligated to see himself as if he went forth from Egypt,” and then the actual performance of the commandments takes place – the eating of matzah and maror. That is, we make the statement about experiencing the Exodus and then perform the commandments, just as the verse speaks of the mouth first followed by the heart.<br>The statement, “Has not fulfilled his obligation” is not meant to be a deterrent to performing the commandments. Whether one makes the statement or not, one has fulfilled the commandment if  one has consumed matzah and maror. Rather, if one wishes to fulfill the commandment properly and completely, one will explain the reason for each commandment.<br> It is possible that Rabban Gamliel disagrees with Rabbis Yose, Eliezer, and Akiva. It is possible that they are stating that we are only obligated to tell the story of the Exodus (the enslavement of the Israelites and the ten plagues) and not the reason for the commandments. He follows their statements by saying, “That is not enough. If you haven’t explained the reason for pesah, matzah and maror, you still haven’t fulfilled the obligation of the night.”   If this explanation is correct, then the proper reading of the text is, “Rabban Gamliel said….” Even so, those who fear God will fulfill both practices: Telling the story of the Exodus and explaining the different Seder practices. That is why we say Rabbis Akiva, Yose and Eliezer’s statements as well as Rabban Gamliel’s statement in our Seder.<br>Another explanation: It is possible that Rabban Gamliel’s did not accept the suggestion that the Torah speaks of four types of children as we saw above. He explained that the so-called wise child’s question has nothing to do with Passover since it is a general question about why God gave us so many different types of commandments. The other three statements to explain Passover to the children, apply not to the type of children but to the three main practices at the Seder: pesah, matzah and maror.
Fulfilled his obligation:  Since the Torah says: “You shall say, ‘it is the Lord’s Passover offering’”  the Tosafot   conclude from this verse, that one must explicitly mention the Passover offering and they then draw a similar conclusion based on this for matzah and maror. Yet it was unnecessary for the Torah to say that it was “the Lord’s Passover offering,” here. The Torah could have said, it is the Passover offering. The name of God comes to tell us about the purpose of this offering and where it would eventually lead the people of Israel. The statement that the Passover offering should be put aside on the tenth day (yud) and the offering was eaten five days (hay) after this which is written hay. Yud-hay are also the final letters of halleluyah. The Five (hay) Books of Moses were given on the sixth of Sivan (vav) together these two spell out vav-hay. We have in these allusions Yud Hay Vav Hay, the unpronounceable name of God. This is the meaning of the statement, “It is the Lord’s (Yud Hay Vav Hay) Passover offering.” 

Line 82

Pesah, which our ancestors ate at the time when the Temple existed: What was the purpose of Rabban Gamliel’s first question since the Torah already explains the purpose of the Passover offering&gt; Also, why do the verses from the Torah which explain the purpose of this offering end with the words, “And the people bowed in homage?”<br>The reason for this has to do with the connection between the Passover offering and the matzah which we eat now.  Normally, the Passover offering is consumed after the Festive offering. Yet the Talmud explains that if one has already recited the blessing for the Passover offering, he is exempted from the Festive offering.  The Passover offering is presented twice. It was brought to the celebrant after pouring the second cup of wine but it is not consumed until the end of the meal. The reason for this is to reflect its double meaning. Similarly, today we eat matzah twice during the Seder: at the beginning of the meal (when we recite the motzi) and at the very end of the meal (the afikomen). The question al shum mah, then, is meant to point to the two reasons we eat the Passover at the Seder: it is a symbol of our redemption from Egypt as well as the promise of our entrance into the land of Canaan. Here the verse is meant to answer both reasons for the Passover offering: first to remind us that God took us out of Egypt and second – of our eventual redemption and entrance into the land (“And the people bowed down in homage.”) Both explanations are hinted at in our answer to Rabban Gamliel’s question, al shum mah?

Line 83



Line 84

This matzah which we eat, for what reason: Again, one might say the reason for the matzah is explicitly stated in Scripture. Yet, Scripture explains that in Egypt, matzah was consumed for one day. It was only with the later observance of Pesach that we began to eat it for a whole seven days.  Rabban Gamliel’s statement would then be an answer to the question of why we eat matzah for seven days and not just on the first day. Yet the Torah tells us this as well; in Exodus, chapter 12, Scripture says we should eat matzah for seven days. Here Rabban Gamliel explains a second reason we eat matzah: first we eat it because it is ‘the bread of affliction,’ and the second time (at the end of the Seder) we eat it is as a reminder of the ‘redemption from slavery.’<br>There are different traditions about which matzah one should hold up when reading Rabban Gamliel’s statement. According to some opinions, one should hold up the middle broken piece of matzah since it symbolizes the bread of affliction. Others claim that the hidden piece of matzah is considered to be the bread of affliction. Still others claim that one should hold up the top whole matzah as a symbol of redemption. Rabbi Weil is of the opinion that one should lift up the broken piece of matzah when reciting Rabban Gamliel’s statement, and that the hidden piece of matzah is the part that is called lechem oni, the bread of the poor.

Line 85



Line 86

This maror which we eat, for what reason:  Why do we mention matzah which symbolizes the redemption before mentioning maror, a reminder of the oppression? It would have made more sense to mention these two symbols in reverse order! Rambam mentions them in reverse order. Yet he still suggests that one must recite the blessing for the matzah before the maror.  We also find that in scripture matzah precedes maror, “Matzot and Maror you shall eat.”<br>Maror gains its significance because of its connection to the giving of the commandments at Mount Sinai. We, therefore, mention it after the matzah. Rabbi Isaiah Horowitz (Shelah) offers the following explanation: The reason matzah is mentioned before maror is that Israel could not receive the Torah until there were 600,000 Israelites (like the number of letters in the Torah) to receive the Torah. The essence of the redemption was the giving of the Torah to Israel. The Torah tells us that oppression and bitterness brought about an increase in the number of Israelites. The bitterness of oppression brought about the events at Mount Sinai. Without the bitterness of oppression they would not become worthy of receiving the Torah. 

Line 87

In every generation: All of this is part of Rabban Gamliel’s statement. It explains why matzah is considered a Torah law (d’oraita) while eating maror is rabbinic (d’rabbanan). Why is there a difference in the status of these two symbols?   According to Rabban Gamliel we are obligated by the Torah to see ourselves as if we went forth from Egypt. The matzah serves as a reminder of this biblical mandate while maror reminds us of slavery (which we are not obligated by the Torah to remember.) Matzah allows us to see ourselves in this fashion.<br>Yet, what purpose is there in “seeing ourselves” as if we personally went forth from Egypt; many generations have passed since the Exodus - what good is there is in seeing the redemption in this way?  This teaches us that the purpose of the redemption was not just the liberation from slavery in Egypt but also the fact that we could enter the land of Israel, build the temple, and seek atonement for our sins. Also the matzah alludes to the future redemption as well. The afikomen is an allusion to the final redemption, which is called tzafun bareikh, the hidden blessing. It is because of these hopes that scripture made matzah an obligation, “You shall eat matzot at night,”  This is an allusion to the fact that we eat matzah during the night (of exile) which comes before the light (of redemption.)
To see himself (atzmo) as if he went forth from Egypt:  The statement here could have been “To imagine that he went forth from Egypt;” the word atzmo was unnecessary.  Why was it necessary to say, ‘himself?’  We learn in the Talmud that if a one’s father experienced a miracle, his children and offspring must continue to give thanks.   The redemption from Egypt goes much farther than that. We are grateful not just because of our ancestors but because we ourselves benefited from God’s redemption. We are the direct recipients of God’s goodness in the Exodus (otherwise ‘we might still be slaves.’) We are commanded to give thanks not because it affected our forefathers but because we directly benefit from God’s redemption. 

Line 88



Line 89

Therefore we are obligated to give thanks: The older version of this passage contains seven terms of thanksgiving, for the seven levels of the firmament.  Our version of this statement contains nine terms, for the seven firmaments, the sun and the moon. Others explain that the nine terms are a reference to the nine supernal Sephirot and the tenth, Malchut is reference to the term l’mi sh’asa la’avoteinu, “to the one who did for our ancestors.” The tenth Sephirah, like the moon, receives its radiance from the other heavenly bodies; so too, Malchut receives its flow of justice and mercy from the other Sephirot. The nine terms of thanksgiving are for the six blessings: miracles, freedom, joy, festive day, light, redemption. Together these six blessings contain fifteen words, like the fifteen verses of dayeinu, and the name of God (Yud Hei). To this we conclude Hallelu-YAH (Yud Hei)! 

Line 90

Psalm 113<br>Halleluyah! Praise the servants of Adonai, Praise the name of Adonai:  As long as we are in exile we cannot be called “servants of Adonai,” as we learn in the Talmud: We do not recite Hallel on Purim because it refers to us as servants of Adonai and we were still servants of Achashveros following the events in Shushan. We will only become true servants of God following the final redemption.   Similarly, in exile God can only be referred to as Yah and not by His full name, YHVH.  That is why we say, “The entire soul shall praise Yah,”  “On that day Adonai shall be one and His Name one.”  That is, in the Temple God was referred to by His whole name and in the future redemption we will begin to refer to God by His full name. This is the meaning of the passage from Psalms: When we become true servants of Adonai in the future, then we will be able to praise the (full) name of Adonai. Similarly in the future we will no longer respond to prayers with Amen, but with the words, “May the name of Adonai be blessed from now and  forever,”   as was the practice in the Holy Temple.<br>Another interpretation: This Psalm is all about the hope for redemption and the role we play in our own redemption by “completing the name of God.” We begin by saying “Praise the servants of Adonai,” - during a time of exile, those who fear God are called “servants of Adonai.” During the future redemption those who fear God will come to be known as “children of Adonai.”<br>Even during this time of bitter exile, we are obligated to give thanks and praise God for we still put our trust in Him and His great name.  God’s name proves that we will be redeemed. YHVH is a verb of being: it can mean was, is or will be. Just as God told Moses that His name was, ‘I will be what I will be,’ so this name proves that God will not abandon His people for the sake of His great name. Any time we make mention of God’s name in exile, we arouse the memory that God’s name is not complete. As a result the Holy One forgoes His glory in order to bring about our redemption. In exile, therefore, we must glorify God’s name; by doing so we remind God of His compassion.<br>This is the meaning of this Psalm. “Let the servants of Adonai Praise,” in exile.<br>What should the praise be? “Praise the name of the Adonai.”<br>Then God’s compassion will be aroused for the sake of His name, and we will respond, “Let the name of Adonai be blessed.”<br>“Let the name of Adonai” – be complete: “From now” – in this time of exile; “And forever” – until the time in the future when “God will be one and His name will be one.”<br>We must bless the evil along with the good, and acknowledge that all that God does is ultimately for the good. Just as a father has compassion on his children, so God has compassion on those who revere Him, and God never removes His providence from us, watching us and constantly keeping an eye on us. 
The Psalmist now gives a proof of Divine Providence: “From the eastern rising of the sun to it setting in the west, the name of God is praised.” Actually the sun and the stars are supposed to rise in the West and set in the East.   The sun is like a king it is the like a king because it is the largest and most influential of all the heavenly bodies; it appears 365 days a year, and its place in the heavens determines the length of days and the seasons. Yet it is forced against its will to rise in the East and to travel toward the west which is the location of the Shechinah, the divine presence.  It is through this process that we learn that that there is a higher power that determines all things in the universe. And because of this power, the sun must offer and sing praises to God. We see this as well in the story of Joshua and the battle of Gibeon in which the ‘sun stood still.’  The sun was forced to stand still against the natural process. Therefore we say: “From the rising of the sun in the east to its setting in the west God’s name is being praised” – it is being praised at every moment in the present because its movement is a sign of God’s power.  Similarly, we say: The heavens declare God’s glory and the firmament recount the work of his hands.”   The commentators explain that God cannot be known by His essence; we can only know God through His actions. Thus we see through the cycle of the sun God’s providence upon all His creations, and that God is the creator of everything; God even determines the cycle of the planets and the stars. As we learn in the works of the Jewish philosophers there is no movement without a Prime Mover. The Movement of the sun (against its natural order) is sign that God is the Prime Mover. God is praised because God is always present and is the creator of all things.
Those who deny Divine Providence say: “God is far above all the nations; His glory is far above the Heavens.”  There are those among the nations who claim that there is a God in the universe but that God is far removed from the world and does not influence the doings of this world.  They deny the reality of Divine Providence. God is “far above nations” and does not involve Himself in the doings of this lowly world. Therefore they can feel that they can act in an evil fashion toward the people of this world and that they do not have to worry about fearing God or facing punishment. We have been given proof that God’s providence can be experienced in this world. We have four proofs: (1) The Exodus from Egypt and the giving of the Torah at Mount Sinai; (2) God lowered Himself and dwelled over the Holy ark; (3) God brought Israel into the land of Israel and helped them to succeed; (4) In the future, God will dwell among the community or righteous and pious people.  These four proofs are contained in the continuation of the Psalm.
Who is like Adonai who caused God to lift up (hamgbihi) to be seen: This is an allusion to the Exodus and to the theophany at Mount Sinai. On these occasions God lowered Himself so that the people could perceive God’s presence. As we read: God went before them by day…” and “This is My God and I will glorify Him.”  God also set up a perimeter around Mount Sinai and then came down on the mountain so that all Israel could “see the sounds” and sights of the revelation. God appeared to them like an old sage who sat and taught. This is what is meant by the verse, “God will stoop down low.”<br>It has been pointed out that there are five extra yud’s at the ends of the verbs in this passage: hagbihi  (He lifted up) hamashpili (He stooped), mikimi (He lifts up), l’hoshivi (to  cause to dwell), and moshivi. (He causes to dwell). The yud at the end of each of these words is a poetic flourish and unnecessary. What can we learn from them? There are those who explain the hidden meanings of the Torah who say that the five yudin equal fifty – they come to replace the missing verse in the Ashrai which should begin with a nun (50). Others explain that God never descended more than ten tefachs (a measure) to appear to the people.   But the most literal explanation has to do with the name of God which begins with a yud. When God reveals Himself to the people of Israel, His name (which begins with a yud) is joined to the name Israel (which also begins with a yud). The letter yud, then, symbolizes the connection between God and Israel, between heaven and earth. Yud is also the last of the single digits and the first of the multiples of ten. That is what we mean when we say “I am the first and I am the last.” God’s name begins with a yud to teach us that God is the beginning and end of all things. Similarly God is the beginning and end of all the nations. The Divine Presence which is one is connected to Israel which is one are expressed by the word hamagbihi lirot, “Who is like Adonai who caused God to lift up to be seen.”
He will stoop down low (hamashpili) to see what happens on earth and in heaven: This is an allusion to Tzimtzum, God’s contraction in the world.  God contracted Himself so that He could dwell between the posts of the ark.  Similarly, Solomon said: “Behold, the heavens and the heavens of the heavens cannot contain You…”  But because of God’s great love, He lowered Himself and He caused His presence to dwell among us. “The world is full of His glory; yet God caused his Yud/presence to be contracted – that is, His Divine Presence in the Temple.
He raises (mikimi) up the poor from the dust: This is a reference to our entrance into the land of Israel and all the miracles that were revealed to us. In the desert we were like homeless and needy people; God brought a great and mighty nation which was like the dust of the earth into the land of Canaan. God never left the people from the time they entered into the land until the destruction of the first  Temple. Thus the verse says, “God raises up the yud which symbolizes the partnership of God and Israel. During the time of the Second temple this partnership did not exist in the same way that it did during the first temple. That is why the second half of the verse, “From the dung hill he lifted the needy.” (The verb in the second part of the verse does not contain the extra yud - yarimi -like the first part of the verse). Ashpot, the dung hill refers to the refuse that is thrown away after one has eaten. It is a refuse to exile. We pray that God will lift us up because, “In every generation there are those who rise up against us to destroy us…” but the holy One saves us from them with God’s Divine Presence.
To cause us to dwell among the nidivim (princes): This is a reference to the pious and righteous of the community. They are called nidivim because they do more than is required of them by the law. This is the difference between nedavah (free will) and hovah (obligatory). The righteous give freely of themselves; not because they are obligated to do so. They are the great ones of the generations who arouse others to repentance like prophets and seers. We hope that God “will cause the childless of the household…” Israel is called the childless of the household because she has not yet given birth. Sometimes a woman is childless for reasons that are not related to her ability to give birth but rather because of her husband. If she does not have a womb then it is obvious that it is because of her. Similarly, in the exile, Israel’s childless was caused by her and not her husband.<br>Akeret also comes from the same root as akira, to uproot. We were uprooted from our Holy Temple where we could rejoice with the greatest of joy. And we hope for a day when Israel will again be a mother – that is, the people will again have Jerusalem and a Temple.
The happy mother (eim) of children: The word for mother is eim. It is a reference to those who will bring about Israel’s redemption: In Egypt there was Aaron and Moses; in the time Purim there was Esther and Mordechai; and in the Messianic era, Elijah and the Messiah.<br>This verse is also a reference to the story of the Exodus. Yocheved was called “childless of the household” when Amram divorced her; but when he took her back she was called “happy mother.”<br>The Talmud offers another interpretation. Akeret is from eekar, the essence or the mainstay. In the Talmud we learn: “And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that He made them houses. Rab and Samuel [differ in their interpretation]; one said they are the priestly and Levitical houses, and the other said they are the royal houses. One who says they are the priestly and Levitical houses: Aaron and Moses; and one who says they are the royal houses: for also David descended from Miriam.”  That is, Yocheved was the eekar, the main member of the household. When Amram took Yocheved back Aaron and Miriam danced with joy and the angels rejoiced – that is why the word eim is an abbreviation for Aaron and Miriam. “Halleluyah” can be read as two words: hallelu (praise) and Yah, the name of God. God dwells in the midst of a couple who love one another; the Yud is from the word eesh, husband, and the hay is from the word eeshah, wife.  

Line 91

Psalm 114<br>When Israel went forth from Egypt, the House of Jacob from a foreign tongue: We are commanded: “Let him share one (lamb) with his neighbors who dwell nearby, in proportion to the number of persons; you shall contribute (tachosu) for the lamb according to what each household will eat.”  The word tachosu contains the same letters as the word kosot. But what is the connection between the four cups of wine and the Passover offering. Elsewhere  we learn that the four cups of wine were in celebration for the four mitzvot which the Israelites performed while they were slaves in Egypt: (1) They were never suspected of sexual immorality. (2) They were not suspected of gossip or slander. (3) They continued to use the Hebrew language in Egypt. (4) They did not take on Egyptian names so that they had a distinctive identity. It was for these four reasons that there are four promises of redemption and four cups of wine. So what is the connection to the Passover offering?  The words tachosu al seh, “Let them share one lamb” Tachosu refers to the kosot, the four cups of wine. And al seh stands for arayot (sexual immorality); lashon harah (gossip); shem (their names); and hadibur (their speech). 
We can now interpret Psalm 114. When Israel went forth from Egypt – Israel the people who hadn’t changed their names. The house of Jacob – the women of Israel who maintained the highest standards of behavior. From a foreign tongue – the people did not change their language. Judah became His holy one – they did not desecrate God by speaking gossip and slander. And because of these four qualities, Israel became their dominion…
Another Interpretation: In Psalm 114 why do we first refer to the Jewish people as ‘Israel’ and then as ‘the house of Jacob?’ And why do we first say ‘Egypt’ and then, ‘a foreign tongue?’ We learn that one of the reason for that Israel had to spend time in Egypt was to redeem the holy sparks that were still present there and to convert those who had such holy sparks in them. Thus, the House of Jacob refers to the converts. We say, Israel went forth from Egypt and the converts from among the people who spoke in a foreign tongue… The prohibition against living in Egypt only applied in ancient times when these holy sparks had already been taken out of Egypt. But today, once again there are sparks in Egypt so we must live their just as we live throughout the Diaspora to bring about this redemption of sparks. Rabbi Isaac Luria explains the verse: “At the end of 430 years the host Israel went forth from Egypt.” We do not say ‘children of Israel went for the Egypt’ in order to teach that the Israelites had liberated all the divine sparks which are referred to as the host of Israel. Israel had gathered up all the holiness that was to be found in Egypt. That is why they were able to leave earlier than they had been told before – they had completed the purpose of the presence in Egypt. 
Psalm 114 is a psalm about the splitting of the Red Sea, and later the Jordan River when the people entered the land of Canaan. The psalmist asks: “What alarmed you that you fled?” According to one Midrash the sea fled when it saw the casket of Joseph which the Israelites had taken out of Egypt.  “O Lord in the presence of the Adonai” – another Midrash teaches that the sea refused to split until God Himself appeared.   But in Dayyenu we say “If God had split the sea but not taken us through it on dry land, it would have been enough for us.” This implies that the sea spit immediately. However, it was still covered with mud and not completely dry. The Holy one wanted to show through the Exodus a completely different type of act of creation, that there would not remain even a drop of water when the Israelites passed through the sea, and this could not happen until God appeared in all His glory; only then could the people of Israel pass through the sea ‘on dry land.’<br>Also, normally the sea floor is full of high and low places. But when God appeared at the sea, God not only dried up the sea but flattened the sea bed so that the people could easily walk through the sea from one side to the other. Israel was also able to drink water from the sea – the water that spurt forth was fresh and sweet – it came forth from fountains deep beneath the earth. There was also all types of delicious fruit that came from the mountains and hills that was growing on the sea floor so that there was food for them to eat as well. 

Section 6



Section 7



Section 8



Section 9



Section 10



Section 11



Section 12



Section 13



Section 14



Line 1



Line 2



Line 3



Line 4



Line 5



Line 6



Line 7



Line 8



Line 9

Echad mi yodeah and Dayeinu – the Connection<br>Rabbi Weil writes that Echad mi yodea and Chad gadya are two anonymous poems that were hidden away in the Beit Midrash in Germiza. It became the practice to recite them on Passover night. But what is the connection between Echad mi yodea and Passover. He interprets the verses of Echad Mi Yodeah as a celebration of the favors (ma’alot) which God bestowed upon Israel which we mention in the song, Dayeinu. We ask about the numbers because each number symbolically reminds us of the process of redemption from Egypt to the building of the Holy temple.
Who knows one?  “One is our God who is in heaven and on earth” represents the first of the favors which God bestowed upon Israel: God executed judgment upon the Egyptians. This explains why the Ten Commandments begin “I am the Lord your God who took you out of the land of Egypt,” and not, “…who created the heavens and the earth.” Also, why the Shabbat is said to be a reminder of the Exodus in the Kiddush, and why we mention the Exodus in connection with Tefillin and the holidays: “that the generations to come may know that I am the Lord who caused you to dwell in booths when I took you out of the Land of Egypt.”   The Ramban explains that the Exodus taught us the significance of Divine Providence over the earth.  In that way, those who believe that all matters of the world are determined by the natural forces or that the world is eternal (and not created by God) will recognize the power and acts of God in the world.<br>The fact that God took Israel out of Egypt proves that God has power over nature, and that God can perform wonders and signs. Even the magicians in Egypt acknowledged the power of God when they said, in response to the third plague, “It is the finger of God.” In the first stanza of Echad Mi Yodea we begin by acknowledging God’s unity and power over heaven and earth. That is why, when Israel cried out to God, God “heard their voice.” This proves that God is in heaven and on earth. The Exodus taught us the first principle of faith.<br>The question “Who knows one” implies something else as well. Rabbi Bahya Ibn Pakuda in his philosophical work teaches that there are two types of “Oneness:” there is a numerical one – as in not two, not three, etc; and there is a qualitative one – as in the uniqueness and unity of God. The question then, is “Who knows the real one,” – not the numerical but the qualitative meaning of God’s oneness. The real One is OUR GOD. And how do we know the unity and uniqueness of God – we know God not by His essence (which is unknowable) but by his creations in Heaven above and on Earth. We know God through God’s deeds.
Who knows two? Two are the tablets of the covenant represent the second favor which God bestowed upon Israel: Our God judged not just the land but the gods of Egypt. The second commandment of the Decalogue is, “You shall have no other gods before me.” Thus by judging the gods of Egypt God showed us that the gods of the land are mere idols. Both the living and the dead were judged during the tenth plague. God not only killed the first born of Egypt (who were the divinity of the land) but even the first born that had already died. The people of Egypt had grave stones for their diseased first born – but during the tenth plague these stones crumbled! God commanded the Israelites to go gather up the lambs of Egypt for sacrifice showing their disregard for the gods of Egypt. That is also why the Israelites were told that they could offer a ram or a goat – both were worshipped in Egypt.<br>Most forms of witchcraft are performed through seduction. That is why the commandments of no other gods and no adultery are connected to one another.  There is a teaching that the first five commandments are connected in sequence to the second five commandments. Thus, the second commandment – you shall have no gods before me – is connected to the seventh commandment – you shall not commit adultery.  Similarly in Proverbs, idolatry is connected to following after wanton women. These two commandments are connected to one another. This is the meaning of the statement: that the judgment of Egypt’s gods is connected to the two tablets of the covenant. The first tablet – no other gods before me; and the second tablet – do not commit adultery.
Who knows three?  The three Patriarchs represent the third favor which God bestowed upon Israel: he slew the firstborn of Egypt. God struck down three types of first born: those who are the firstborn of their mother, those who were firstborn of their father, and even the firstborn of the slaves. Abraham is described in the Torah as the firstborn of Terach, his father. (“Terach begat Abram, Nachor and Haran.” ) Isaac was the first born of Sarah though not his father’s firstborn. And Jacob had firstborn children not only with Rachel and Leah, but with Zilpah and Bilhah. The gematriah of the makat bechorot, the plague of the firstborn, has the same value as hayu b’zkhut Avraham, Yitzchak v’Ya’akov, “they were for the merit of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.”  Both equal 1100. It was because of the merit of the forefathers that the Egyptian first-born were struck down. 
Who knows four? The four matriarchs represent the fourth favor which God bestowed upon Israel: God gave us the wealth of the Egyptians. Why is it that the redemption of the firstborn is attributed to the mother’s firstborn and not the father’s firstborn, especially since the father’s firstborn were apparently struck down as well? This is because the loot which the Israelites took in Egypt was given to them as a reward for the righteous women of Israel. We learn that Israel was redeemed because of the righteousness of Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel and Leah. Sarah – because she allowed her husband to bed Hagar; Rebecca – because she left her father’s home and went to Canaan to marry Isaac; Rachel – because she allowed her sister Leah to bed their husband; and Leah – because she gave her concubine Bilhah to her husband when she was barren.    The four promises of redemption were the rewards for the four matriarchs. Hotzeiti means I will take you out. Hitzalti – I will save you - means not only that they left Egypt but they took plunder (vayinatzel) from the Egyptians. Ga’alti – I will redeem you - means that I redeemed you by splitting the Red Sea. Lakachti - I will take – means that I allowed you to take plunder at the shore of the sea, from the Egyptians after they drown in the sea. These four terms are connected to the four matriarchs.
Who knows five? The five books of the Torah represent the fifth favor which God bestowed upon Israel: God split the sea. In Egypt the plagues are called the finger of God; at the sea God’s acts are called the hand of God; five fingers. It was though the merit of the five books of Moses that Israel was redeemed from Egypt at the sea with God’s mighty hand, and that they were brought to Mount Sinai. We learn that when the Israelites reached the sea, the angel Gabriel surrounded the nation and called out, “Beware! Israel is going to receive the Torah from the right hand of God!”
Who knows six?  The  six sections of the Mishnah, the basis of the Oral Torah, represent the sixth favor which God bestowed upon Israel: God led the people through the sea on dry ground. The Torah is sometimes referred to as ‘a great sea.’ For, “all the rivers go down to the sea, but the sea is never full.”  The Torah was given to Israel; like the number of people who left Egypt, the Torah has 600, 000 letters. Each Israelite has one letter that he can uniquely hold on to. It is impossible to understand the Written Torah without the Oral Torah for each letter has thousands of meanings and interpretations. It is through the Oral Torah that we are able to pass through the great sea of the Written Torah. So too, when Israel crossed through the sea wherever the stepped immediately became perfectly dry so that there was no mud. This is how the Oral Torah is. It makes sure that we don’t get bogged down in understanding the Written Torah. Just as the people were 600,000, so the Oral law has six volumes.
Who knows seven? The seven days of the week represents the seventh favor which God bestowed upon Israel: God caused the Egyptians to sink in the sea. After leaving Egypt, the people spent seven days suffering. They knew they were no better than the Egyptians; like them, they worshipped idols. During these seven days, then, they had time to atone for all the transgressions they had committed while in Egypt. By repenting, the Israelites changed their destiny. They had seven days to repent because there are seven days in a week. In this way a person’s destiny could change on the same day of the week on which they were born. The Egyptians tried to use their magic to undo these changes but their astrologic influences weakened, and as a result they sank in the sea when they arrived at the Red Sea. So when we ask “Who knows seven,” we answer ‘seven are the days of the week’ because these seven days were a time of repentance. Also the seventh day was Shabbat – which the Israelites observed even in the land of Egypt – it was due to the merit of observing the Sabbath that the Egyptians drown in the sea.
Who knows eight? Brit milah on the eighth day of the week represents the eighth favor which God bestowed upon Israel: He provided Israel with all their needs in the wilderness. This refers to the statement that God did not allow their clothing to wear out during the forty years in the wilderness.  During the sojourn in the wilderness the Israelites were protected by clouds of glory that surrounded them and led them through the wilderness. There were six clouds that surrounded the people – on all four sides, above and below as well as the pillar of fire and the cloud of glory that led them through the wilderness. These clouds not only protected their clothes but caused it to grow with them and kept it clean. There were eight clouds for the eight days before the making of the covenant. They eight days until circumcision symbolize the eight clouds.
Who knows nine?  Nine months of pregnancy represent the ninth favor which God bestowed upon Israel: God gave Israel manna. According to the Midrash, the manna revealed whether a new born child was a nine month baby from the first husband or a seven month birth from the second husband. Manna then was essential for identifying who the parents of a child were.
Who knows ten? The Ten Commandments represent the tenth favor which God bestowed upon Israel: God gave us the Sabbath. When God gave Israel the Torah, he said to the people, “If you will observe My commandments, I will give a portion in the world to come.” Israel asked, “Show us an example of the world to come.” To which He answered: “This is the Sabbath.”  That is why the Sabbath is considered equal to all the other commandments.  Also we learn, “If one observes the Sabbath, even if he worships idols, God overlooks this sin!”   The Sabbath then is equal to the other commandments in the Ten Commandments. Also when Israel agreed to accept the Torah as a whole they were rewarded with the  Sabbath, a small portion of the world to come.
Who knows eleven? The eleven stars in Joseph’s dream represent the eleventh favor which God bestowed upon Israel: God brought us close to Mount Sinai. God brought the Israelites to Mount Sinai in order to weaken the forces of impurity which surrounded them. Had they not sinned by worshipping the golden calf, the power of purity would have spread forth throughout the world. There are eleven husks of impurity associated with the children of Esau. Parallel to them there are eleven types of incense used in the temple, and eleven verses that begin with a nun and end with a nun, that can help destroy the husks of impurity. When Joseph dreamed of eleven stars bowing down to him, this was a messianic vision of the end of time – for there will be a Messiah who is a ben Yosef.  These eleven stars, then, are the powers of purity that would help make Israel worthy of the covenant.
Who knows twelve? The twelve tribes represent the twelfth favor which God bestowed upon Israel: God gave us the Torah. Why was the Torah given in the third month, and what special status is there in this? The third month is connected with the third tribe – Levi. Each of the tribes is associated with one of the twelve months of the year. Thus, this explains the connection between the twelve tribes and the giving of the Torah. Moses who comes from the third tribe had to be the teacher of Torah which was given in the third month.
Who knows thirteen? The thirteen attributes of God represent the thirteenth favor which God bestowed upon Israel: He brought them into the land of Israel (and let them build the temple). This is the greatest favor of all – there is nothing higher!  For through these favors, the divine presence came to dwell among the people. The land was divided among the twelve tribes (counting Ephraim and Menasheh) plus all of the cities of refuge were given to the tribe of Levi. Thus, there were thirteen portions to the land. These thirteen portions parallel the thirteen attributes of God. There are also thirteen days from Rosh Hodesh Nisan until the eve of Passover. These are days of redemption and are associated with these attributes. 
•	The first day of Nisan is Rosh Hodesh, the first day of Nisan, is the day on which the Tabernacle was dedicated and the Holy one dwelled among the people, “In heaven and on earth”
•	The second day of Nisan falls on the same day of the week as Shavuot, the day on which the Torah was given to Israel. It is the day on which we received the two tablets of the covenant.
•	The third day of Nisan falls on the same day that Rosh Hashanah falls that year – it is a day when we recall the three Patriarchs. 
•	The fourth day of Nisan falls on the same day as the second day of Rosh Hashanah, the eve of Yom Kippur and the second day of Sukkot, and Simchat Torah – it is associated with the four matriarchs. 
•	The fifth day of Nisan falls on the same day of the week as Yom Kippur, the day on which Moses brought down the second set of tablets from Sinai and Israel knew that it had been forgiven for worshipping the golden calf. 
•	The sixth day of Nisan falls on the same day of the week as Purim. According to the sages, it was on Purim that the Jewish people accepted the Torah freely  - this is the day on which they accepted the oral Torah as well as the written Torah (and so it is connected with the six volumes of the Mishnah.) 
•	The seventh day of Nisan falls on the same day of the week as the eve of Passover. Since the people had to come to the temple to offer the Passover sacrifice they had to undergo a process of purification beforehand which involved purification on the third and seventh day. Thus it took the seven days of the week to purify themselves.
•	The eighth day of Nisan falls on the same day as the Eve of Shavuot and the end of the counting of the Omer. We must count seven ‘clean weeks’ just as a woman must count seven clean days before going to the Mikvah to immerse herself. Also after giving birth to a son, the mother must count seven days of impurity. On the eighth day the circumcision takes place! The eighth day, then is a day of great gladness and rejoicing.
•	The ninth day of Nisan is associated with the redemption. Even though the people were freed from servitude on Rosh Hashanah they still could not leave Egypt. The first to the ninth day of Nisan were like the nine months of pregnancy, and the redemption began on the tenth when they were told to put aside the Passover offering.
•	The tenth day of Nisan falls on the same day of the week as the second day of Shavuot. There are those who say that the ten commandments were given not on the sixth but the seventh day of Sivan (the second day of the holiday). Thus the tenth day is also associated with the Ten Commandments.
•	The eleventh day of Nisan is the day on which the astrological sign of the lamb fell from favor. Thus there were only eleven astrological signs
•	The twelfth day of Nisan was the day on which each of the princes of Israel brought gifts to the Tabernacle - and it was considered to be a festive day. It is connected with the twelve tribes. 
•	The thirteenth day of Nisan has many associations. There are thirteen principles of interpretation in the Torah, thirteen is the age of Bar Mitzvah, and there are thirteen letters in the Hebrew names of Abraham Isaac and Jacob. The word echad, One, is equal to thirteen in gematriah. Each of the thirteen principles of interpretations are connected with the names of the Patriarchs, and one who breaks the laws is lashed thirty nine times which is three times thirteen – for the three patriarchs. Passover could not occur until after the thirteenth day – just as a Bar Mitzvah must wait until his thirteenth birthday to be called to the Torah.


Line 10

Had Gadya – In Introduction<br>To the Symbolic Chart<br>Rabbi Yonatan Weil (father of the author of this commentary) offered the following comments on Had Gadya: “It has always surprised me that on this night when we are considered to be like royalty, are allowed to see ourselves as if we joyfully went forth from Egypt, and can be extravagant in the way we set the table, we don’t need to focus on the destruction of Jerusalem. Isn’t it written, I shall place Jerusalem above my greatest joy.”   (We do mention of Jerusalem in Ha lachma anya, in the piyutim we recite at the end of the Seder and at the words of Nirtzah, “Let us return Zion joyfully as a redeemed people.”) We downplay the destruction of Jerusalem for the sake of the masses on this night but the remnant of Israel, those who have accepted the name of God upon themselves, recite this riddle in order to keep in mind the destruction of the Temple at the end of the Seder, after we have told the story of the Exodus and have fulfilled all of our obligations on this night. They do so because matzah is the lechem oni, not just the bread of affliction but the food that causes us to ask and answer many questions (onim). In this way we think of affliction amid the extravagance of the meal.<br>We begin by mentioning had gadya twice for the two temples that were destroyed, first in 586 BCE and the second in 70 CE. In the temple the people brought all types of sacrifices including goats. Fortunate is the one who witnessed these sacrifices as well as the special service on the eve of Passover….”<br>After offering his father’s interpretation, the younger Rabbi Weil writes: “This song is sung throughout the Diaspora. I have learned that it was discovered in the academy of the Rokeach  in Germaize on a parchment. It became the accepted practice for the generations to sing it on the eve of Passover. This is no frivolous matter.  If we think it is an empty song then the problem is with us and not with it. Many have studied it in depth to plumb meaning from its words – I have already presented my father’s interpretation of it. Now with my limited intellect I will present two other interpretations of this poem…”<br>The Interpretations:<br>1.	Rabbi Yonatan interprets this poem as a lament for the destruction of the Temple. The gadya refers to the Temple, and the refrain is a lament in which we are in affect saying, Where is the Temple? Where is the Temple? He understands the poem as an explanation of the exile from the time of the second temple on. After living under the tyranny or Greece and then Rome, Israel lived in exile beneath the other nations. In order to overcome the other nations Israel must have the strength to overcome its evil inclinations as well as the seductions of the world. In the end of time God will slaughter the evil inclination and the Temple will be rebuilt.<br>2.	Rabbi Yedidiah explains that Had Gadya is all about the sin against Joseph by his brothers. Israel carried this sin through the generations. Weil claims that Amon No, the God of Egypt had the form of a ram on its right hand and the form of a goat on its left hand. These were indictment of Israel – the Ram because Abraham sacrificed a ram in lieu of his son without purchasing it, and the goat for the goat the brothers used to make it appear that Joseph had been killed by a wild animal. Israel atoned for the ram by offering a ram in Egypt but the indictment of the goat remained through the generations – and will continue to be present until the rise of Messiah ben Joseph.  According to one tradition in the Middle Ages there is a second Messiah who will rise before the Messiah ben David. With his death the atonement for the story of Joseph will be complete. Had Gadya…Had Gadya is understood as meaning’ one has fallen’ (the ram) and ‘one goat remains.’  Gadya has two meanings. Godu is to cut down and gadya is a goat.<br>3.	The second interpretation of Rabbi Yedidiah understands Had Gadya as a reference to the nations under which the people of Israel had to live. The gadya is the people of Israel. In Song of Songs, we find an expression: “If you do not know, O fairest of women, go follow the tracks of the sheep and graze your kids by the tents of the shepherds.”  Why do we repeat Had gadya twice? Whether or not Israel observes all of God’s commandments they will always be God’s ‘kid.’ Also Israel is one nation just as there is one ‘kid.’  God acquired Israel for two zuzim; the two here is a reference to the idea that Israel is ‘God’s possession.’ In the song at the Red sea we say: “In your love you lead the people you have redeemed (ga’alta),”  and, “Till your people cross over whom You have ransomed (kaneeta)”  Both of these words here and elsewhere imply to acquire.