Mishneh Torah, Slaves
משנה תורה, הלכות עבדים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Slaves



Chapter 1

A Hebrew servant that is spoken of in the Torah, is a Jew that court of law sold against his will or sold himself of his own will. How so? ...


[If someone] comes and says to you, "Indeed I am selling myself to a gentile," you do not need to [help] him until he is sold. But after he is sold to the gentile, even though he transgressed and performed [something] that is not proper, it is a commandment to redeem him, and not [have him] become assimilated with them [i.e. the gentiles], as it is stated, "after that he is sold he may be redeemed" (Leviticus 25:48).
One who sells himself or the court of law forces him, he is not sold in public on a purchasing stone and not in an alley, as the way that slaves are sold, as it says, "they shall not be sold as bondmen" (Leviticus 25:42). Instead [he should be sold] privately and a manner of honor.


[Regarding] people that do not behave well, it is permissible to subjugate them with force and enslave them. [If there is] a king that rules that anyone that does not give the fixed tax, [and that therefore] he is enslaved to whoever pays the tax [for him], it is permissible to use him more than necessary. But not like a [Caananite] slave. [But] if he does not behave well, it is permissible to use him as a [Caananite] slave.

[Someone becomes neither] a female Hebrew servant nor a [male] Hebrew servant except when the Jubilee occurs. This occurs whether a Hebrew servant sells himself or whether a court of law sells him. We have already explained when the Jubilee was canceled.

Chapter 2









9. Whenever a Hebrew servant or maid-servant is redeemed by deducting from the price of the sale, the calculation is always made in his or her favor - whether his health improves and his value increases, or his health deteriorates and his value decreases. What is implied? A servant was sold for 100 dinarim, but now he is worth 200. We calculate the value of the remaining years on the basis of 100. If he was sold for 200 and is now worth 100, we calculate the value of the remaining years on the basis of 100.
10. When a person is sold to a gentile, he can redeem himself partially, as stated above. Sometimes this will work to his advantage, and sometimes it will work to his disadvantage. How can it work to his advantage? His master purchased him for 200 zuz. His value decreased and he is now worth 100. The servant gives his master 50, half of his present worth. He then regains his health and is again worth 200. All he is required to pay is 100, the remaining half of his value. He is then released. How can it work to his disadvantage? His master purchased him for 200 zuz. The servant gave his master half of his worth, 100 zuz. His value then decreased and he is now worth 100. To redeem himself, he must pay his master 50 zuz, half the remaining amount. Thus, he paid 150 zuz to redeem himself even though he is now worth only 100.
11. Although a master forgoes the remaining amount of money for which a servant is obligated to work, this obligation is not considered to be waived until the master writes a bill of release for the servant. What is implied? His master purchased him for 60 zuz. The servant worked for a year or two and then his master told him: "I am willing to waive the work due for the remainder of the money. Go on your way." The servant is not released from his servitude until his master has a legal document composed.
12. The following rules apply when a servant's master dies. If the master is survived by a son, the servant must serve the son until the conclusion of the six years, until the conclusion of the years for which he sold himself, until the Jubilee year, or until he deducts the money for the years he worked and pays the remainder. If, however, the master is not survived by a son, the servant is granted his freedom. He need not serve a surviving daughter or the deceased's brother. Needless to say, he need not serve other heirs. When a servant is sold to a convert or a gentile, he is not required to serve even his master's son. Instead, when his master dies, he attains his freedom. Thus, a Hebrew servant can be acquired through the transfer of money or a bill of sale, and can acquire his freedom through one of five means: a) the conclusion of his years of servitude, b) the advent of the Jubilee year, c) by paying money, an amount reduced in consideration of the years he worked, d) through being given a bill of release, and e) through the death of the master without a son, or if the master is a gentile or a convert, even if he is survived by a son. It is a mitzvah to tell a servant: "Go out," at the time of his release. Nevertheless, even if his master does not tell him this, the servant attains his freedom without any cost. Nor is a bill of release required. Even if he had been sick and his master spent much on his medical expenses, the servant has no obligations to the master, as implied by Exodus 21:2: "He shall go free at no charge."

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6







7. What is meant by the statement that the same laws apply to bills of divorce and bills of release with regard to bringing these legal documents from one place to another? When an agent brings a bill of release from one place to another in Eretz Yisrael, he does not have to testify that it was written and signed in his presence. And in the diaspora, if there are no witnesses present to verify the authenticity of the bill of release, and the agent states that it was written and signed in his presence, its authenticity is considered as verified. Afterwards, if the master comes and protests, no attention is paid to him, as we have explained with regard to a bill of divorce. Just as when a woman brings her bill of divorce, she does not have to have the authenticity of the document verified, because the bill of divorce is in her possession, so too, when a servant's bill of release is in his possession, he does not have to have the authenticity of the document verified. Just as the woman must say: "It was written and signed in my presence," when it was stipulated that she do so, as we have explained in that context, so too, when a servant brings his bill of release and states: "It was written and signed in my presence," his word is accepted in the same way, and he does not have to have the authenticity of the document verified.
8. Everyone who is acceptable to bring a bill of divorce to a woman as the husband's agent is also acceptable to bring a bill of release for a slave as the agent of the master. A slave may receive a bill of release for another slave from that slave's master, but not from his own master. When an owner writes a legal document with which he seeks to consecrate his Canaanite maid-servant, even though he tells her: "Attain your freedom by virtue of this document and become consecrated because of it," this expression is not one that conveys freedom, and she is neither consecrated nor freed.

Chapter 7




When a person seeks to release half of his slave with a bill of release, the slave does not acquire half of his person, and he is a slave just as he was before. If, by contrast, he releases half of a slave, because of a monetary payment - e.g., he took money for half his worth with the intent of freeing that half - the transaction is binding. Thus, he is half slave and half free man. When does the above apply? When the master released half of the slave and retained half. If, however, he freed half of the slave with a legal document and sold the other half, or he freed half with a legal document and gave the other half as a present, since the slave leaves his domain entirely, the slave acquires half of his person, and he is half a slave and half a free man. Similarly, when a slave is owned by two partners, and one frees his half - whether through money or through a legal document - the slave acquires his half, and he is half slave and half free man.
When a master composes a bill of release for his maid-servant who is pregnant, stating "You are free, but your child-to-be remains a slave," his words are binding. If, however, it states: "You remain a maid-servant, but your child-to-be is free," it is of no consequence. For this is as if he freed half of the maid-servant using a legal document.

Chapter 8



Chapter 9








There is no limit to the amount of work you are allowed to give a non-Jewish slave, but even though this is the basic law, the attribute of piety and the ways of wisdom dictate that a person should be merciful and pursue justice and not oppress a slave or cause him anguish. He should feed him, from each kind of food and each kind of drink that he consumes. The earlier Sages would give their slaves from every single dish that was prepared and would ensure that their slaves (and also their animals) would eat before they did. For indeed it is written “like the eyes of slaves to the hand of their masters, like the eye of a maidservant to hand of her mistress” (Tehillim 123). And so too he must not disgrace him, not through action, nor through words, for they have been decreed to serve but not to be disgraced. One should not yell or be angry at them, but must speak patiently and hear his claims. Thus it is explicit that one of Job’s greatest qualities was “Shall I spurn the justice of my slave and my maidservant when they quarrel with me? Were they not made in the belly of my maker? We were conceived in one womb” (Job 31:13-15). Cruelty and brazenness is a trait of idolatress nations, but the seed of Avraham Avinu, which is the Jewish people, to whom the Holy One Blessed Be He has bequeathed the goodness of the Torah and commanded them with righteous statutes (חוקים) and judgements (משפטים) – are compassionate to all. And so are the attributes of the Holy One Blessed be He, which He commanded us to emulate. As it is written: “His mercy is upon all his works” (Tehillim 145) and anyone who is merciful (Hashem is) merciful with him. As it says: “He has given you compassion and been compassionate with you and multiplied you” (Devarim 13:18).