Likkutei Torah
לקוטי תורה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Likkutei_Torah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Likkutei Torah

Beshalach



Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Bamidbar



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11










However in order to reach this elevation and level, to have the aspect of 'I am that which I am' (relating to God beyond our intellectual limits) at the time of the giving of our Torah (Shavuot), one must count the omer. And that is the reason Scripture says (Leviticus 23:16), "you shall count fifty days" - since there are surely fifty gates of wisdom, which is the concept of the revelation of the light of the Ein-Sof, blessed be He - in order to [relate to] the aspect of reflection about the greatness of the Ein-Sof, blessed be He. These are the forty-nine aspects, which are hinted to in the verse (I Chronicles 29:11), "To You O Lord is Greatness, etc.," which are the seven supernal traits, with each one being composed of seven - hence there are forty-nine - and the fiftieth gate, the most elevated gate, which includes all of the aspects. For all of the forty-nine aspects are in that gate, and they are like singular units in a unity; and are not leaves that split, as it is below. (And [these are the words] of the Etz Chayim, Arekh Anpin, Chapter 14 [Sefer Etz Chayim, 13:13], "And there is a gate of fifty that includes all of the forty-nine, etc." And so is it found in the Ramaz (R. Moshe Zachut) on Parashat Emor, page 96b; on Parashat Pinchas, page 253a; and on Parashat Bereishit, page 8a, s. v. Izdamenat Lemeheve. And likewise is it found at length in the Pardes, Section of Gates, Chapter 5.) And this gate is the gate that connects all forty-nine gates to their Source and their Root in their Emanator, blessed be He. For it is in it and through it that the revelation of the aspect of 'I am that which I am' - which is the aspect of the power of the light of the Ein-Sof, blessed be He - is extended to all of the forty-nine gates. (And see the Pardes, ibid., Chapter 7, in the name of the Tikkunei Zohar, and that is at the end of Tikkun 22, "It is what completes the fifty gates of understanding, etc." And so too is it found in the Etz Chayim, op. cit.; and see above in Parashat Yitro, s. v. Mareihem OuMaaseihem.) And that is why it is written, "you shall count fifty days" - to be enmeshed in the fiftieth gate, in which and through which there is a revelation of 'I am.' And this counting is the extension below, to the aspect of the barley omer; which is the revelation of 'I am' even in the aspect of the barley omer below. For behold, every person has a vital spirit - which is the animality, from the aspect of the animal - as well as a divine spirit: "When one is born, they give him a spirit from the side of pure animals [...] If the merits, etc." - as it is written in the Zohar, at the beginning of Parashat Mishpatim (Zohar, Mishpatim 2:11). And its flow and its life is from the aspect of barley, animal food, etc. And in order that it also be the will of his animal soul to be encompassed in the One, and to sacrifice itself, etc., and to transform darkness into light, there must be a revelation of the aspect of 'I am' also in it. So that through this, it will yearn and pine for Him, may He be blessed, with the negation of its essence.

Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Rosh Hashanah



Shabbat Shuvah



Yom Kippur



Ha'Azinu



Sukkot



Shemini Atzeret



V'Zot HaBerachah



Shir HaShirim



Supplements

Shemot



Vayikra



Devarim



Shir HaShirim

