Likkutei Torah
לקוטי תורה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Likkutei Torah

Beshalach



Pekudei



Vayikra



Tzav



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6




<b>And in explanation</b> of the matter, behold it is written in Ruth (3:15), "And he said, etc., while he measured out six measures of barley, etc." And the Gemara (Sanhedrin 93a) explains [that they are] six righteous people, etc. And so is it in the Midrash Rabbah on Ruth on this verse. But at first glance, it is not understood how these great righteous ones are called by the name barley. And see in Chullin, there is also [discussion] about this matter and the Maharasha there in the Chiddushei Aggadot stretched to resolve [this]. But it appears that it can be said that even though the aspect of wheat, which is human food, is much higher than the aspect of barley, animal food - since the aspect of humans is the souls of Emanation, whereas the aspect of animals is the souls of Creation, Formation and Action, and as I wrote in s.v. VeElu HaMishpatim - nevertheless, there is an aspect of animals that is higher than the aspect of humans. That is what our Rabbis, may their memory be blessed, said [in] the first chapter of Chullin (5b:5) about the verse, "man and animal You preserve" (Psalms 36:7): "These are people who are clever in terms of their intellect like (the first) man, but comport themselves (humbly) like an animal." And that is why these [righteous people] are called by the name, barley, which is the food of animals, etc. And this is the aspect of the great animal which is above the aspect of people, as I wrote on Parshat Ekev, s.v. VaYakhilkha et HaMan, see there. And in the Zohar, vol. 3, Parshat Emor 98b (Zohar, Emor 37:186), it explains the six barley grains are the six orders of the Mishnah, and that is [the meaning of] animal food. This means to say that through that, one comes to the aspect and level just mentioned of, "man and animal You preserve" - that is that we make ourselves like animals. And this is according to that which our Rabbis, may their memory be blessed, said in the Midrash Rabbah, Parshat Emor, Chapter 27, "We are like a man, save us like an animal, since we are drawn after You like an animal, etc." And see that which I wrote in s.v. VeHenif HaKohen Otam al Lechem HaBikkurim. However regarding the relationship of the six orders of the Mishnah to barley (<i>seorim</i>), it can be said the Oral Torah is what limits the measurement (<i>shiur</i>) and the size of all the commandments: That tefillin be specifically so and so; and likewise the sukkah, and as I wrote about this in s.v. BeShaah SheHekdimu Yisrael Naaseh.

Bamidbar



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11










However in order to reach this elevation and level, to have the aspect of 'I am that which I am' (relating to God beyond our intellectual limits) at the time of the giving of our Torah (Shavuot), one must count the omer. And that is the reason Scripture says (Leviticus 23:16), "you shall count fifty days" - since there are surely fifty gates of wisdom, which is the concept of the revelation of the light of the Ein-Sof, blessed be He - in order to [relate to] the aspect of reflection about the greatness of the Ein-Sof, blessed be He. These are the forty-nine aspects, which are hinted to in the verse (I Chronicles 29:11), "To You O Lord is Greatness, etc.," which are the seven supernal traits, with each one being composed of seven - hence there are forty-nine - and the fiftieth gate, the most elevated gate, which includes all of the aspects. For all of the forty-nine aspects are in that gate, and they are like singular units in a unity; and are not leaves that split, as it is below. (And [these are the words] of the Etz Chayim, Arekh Anpin, Chapter 14 [Sefer Etz Chayim, 13:13], "And there is a gate of fifty that includes all of the forty-nine, etc." And so is it found in the Ramaz (R. Moshe Zachut) on Parashat Emor, page 96b; on Parashat Pinchas, page 253a; and on Parashat Bereishit, page 8a, s. v. Izdamenat Lemeheve. And likewise is it found at length in the Pardes, Section of Gates, Chapter 5.) And this gate is the gate that connects all forty-nine gates to their Source and their Root in their Emanator, blessed be He. For it is in it and through it that the revelation of the aspect of 'I am that which I am' - which is the aspect of the power of the light of the Ein-Sof, blessed be He - is extended to all of the forty-nine gates. (And see the Pardes, ibid., Chapter 7, in the name of the Tikkunei Zohar, and that is at the end of Tikkun 22, "It is what completes the fifty gates of understanding, etc." And so too is it found in the Etz Chayim, op. cit.; and see above in Parashat Yitro, s. v. Mareihem OuMaaseihem.) And that is why it is written, "you shall count fifty days" - to be enmeshed in the fiftieth gate, in which and through which there is a revelation of 'I am.' And this counting is the extension below, to the aspect of the barley omer; which is the revelation of 'I am' even in the aspect of the barley omer below. For behold, every person has a vital spirit - which is the animality, from the aspect of the animal - as well as a divine spirit: "When one is born, they give him a spirit from the side of pure animals [...] If the merits, etc." - as it is written in the Zohar, at the beginning of Parashat Mishpatim (Zohar, Mishpatim 2:11). And its flow and its life is from the aspect of barley, animal food, etc. And in order that it also be the will of his animal soul to be encompassed in the One, and to sacrifice itself, etc., and to transform darkness into light, there must be a revelation of the aspect of 'I am' also in it. So that through this, it will yearn and pine for Him, may He be blessed, with the negation of its essence.

Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Rosh Hashanah



Shabbat Shuvah



Yom Kippur



Ha'Azinu



Sukkot



Shemini Atzeret



V'Zot HaBerachah



Shir HaShirim



Supplements

Shemot



Vayikra



Devarim



Shir HaShirim

