Likutei Moharan
ליקוטי מוהר"ן
#1 Ashrei Temimei Darekh
https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Likutei_Moharan#.231_Ashrei_Temimei_Darekh



Likutei Moharan

Torah 1

Ashrei temimei darekh, haholkhim be'Torat Hashem/Fortunate are they whose way is perfect, who walk in the Torah/instruction of Hashem (Name of God, Y-H-W-H). (Ps. 119)
Know! Specifically via the Torah, all the prayers and all the requests that we request and pray are received. And the CheN/grace/favor and the chashivut/importance/primacy of Yisrael are raised and heightened for all who need, whether in spiritual [things or] in physical. Because now, due to our many sins, the true favor and primacy of Yisrael have fallen. Because now, the primacy and favor is mostly with the others. But by means of the Torah the grace and importance of Yisrael are raised, for the Torah is called: "ayelet ahavim v'ya`ALat CheN/a lovely ewe and a graceful she-ibex (Prov. 5:19), for she ma`ALah CheN/bestows grace on those who study her (Eruvin 54). And by means of this all the prayers and the requests are received:
For the Israelite man must always look at the sekhel/intellect of every thing, and tie himself to the wisdom and the intellect that there is in every thing, in order that the intellect is in every thing should enlighten him to draw close to Hashem Yithbarakh, by means of that thing. For the intellect is a great light and shines for him in all his ways, as is written (Eccl. 8): "A man's wisdom makes his face shine." And this is the concept of Ya`AQoV, for Ya`akov merited to the firstborn status, which is reishit/head/foremost/beginning, which is the idea of Chokhmah/wisdom. As is written (Ps. 111): reishit chokhmah/the foremost [is] wisdom." And this is like "vaYa`AQ’Veni zeh pa`amayim/for he has hindered me these two times" (Gen. 27:36). Onkelos renders this: "veChaKMeni/for he has outwitted me," and this is the concept of the sun. For the intellect shines for him in all his ways like the sun. [And this is like "But the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn, that shines more and more unto the perfect day."] And this is the idea of ח [the letter CheIT] — which connotes life (ChIUT). For the wisdom and the intelligence are the life of every thing, as is written (Eccl. 7): "the wisdom preserves the life" etc. However, since the light of the intelligence is very great, it is impossible to attain to it except by means of the aspect of נון [the name of the letter נ] which is the idea of Malkhut/kingship, as is written (Ps. 72): "lifnei-shemesh yiNnoN shemo/May he rule as long as the sun," and Rashi explained [yiNnoN as]: ‘A term for Kingship.’ And this is the idea of moon, because the moon, she has no light of her own, only what she receives from the sun (Zohar 3:238). And this is like Malkhut, which has nothing of its own, except what it receives from the cheit, which is like Chokhmah, which is like the sun as mentioned; "and the light of the moon will be as the light of the sun": But whoever does not tie himself to the intellect and the wisdom and the life, that there is in every thing -- behaves like Esav who despised the firstborn status, as is written (Gen. 25): "So Esav despised his birthright"; that is, the intellect as mentioned above, like (Prov. 18): "A fool has no delight in understanding, but only that his heart may lay itself bare." And this is like the Wicked Malkhut, like the moon of the Other Side, of which is it said (Isa. 24): "Then the moon shall be confounded" etc. And this is like the good inclination and the evil inclination, for the good inclination is called "poor and wise" (Eccl. 4), like Malkhut, which is poor and lowly, for it has nothing of its own except what it receives from Chokhmah. And the evil inclination is called an old and foolish king (there), like the Malkhut of the Other Side, which desires not wisdom and intelligence, like "a fool has no delight in understanding" etc. as mentioned above. And it is necessary for everyone to give strength to the aspect of the Malkhut D’Kedushah (of Holiness), to overcome the Malkhut D’Sitra Achra (of the Other Side), as our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Berachot 5): "A man should always stir up the good inclination against the evil inclination." And how can he give strength to the Malkhut D’kedushah? -—through the Torah that he is involved with vigorously (as our Rabbis of blessed memory said there): "A man should always stir up" etc. "If it [the evil inclination] leaves, good, and if not, let him involve himself Torah"), and as our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Kiddushin 30): "If this corrupt one (the evil inclination) incites you, drag him to the Beit Midrash/house of study," for through the Torah one gives strength to the Malkhut D’kedushah. And then the Malkhut/נ, receives life from Chokhmah/ח, so the ח and the נ are connected and tied, and the light of the moon becomes like the light of the sun, "and when one (side) rises the other falls" (Rashi, Gen. 25:23), so the Malkhut D’Sitra Achra falls and is anulled, as is written (Hos. 14): "For the ways of Hashem are right, and the just shall walk in them: but the transgressors shall fall in them." That is, through the ways of Hashem -- i.e. the Torah -- through this the righteous who are bound to the Malkhut D’kedushah, they are strengthened and receive strength through this. "But the transgressors shall fall in them," like the Malkhut D’Sitra Achra, like the evil inclination, which falls and is suppressed through the Torah as mentioned above:
And through this are received all the prayers and requests, for the main reason why requests are not received -- is because the words have no chein /charm/grace/favor, and do not enter into the heart of the one that they are requesting from, as if there is no space in his heart so that the words should enter into his heart, because the requester has no grace so that the words should enter into the heart of the one that he is requesting from; but through the Torah, through which the ח and the נ are connected as mentioned above and חן/CheN/grace is made, and therefore the Torah is called ya`alat chen (Prov. 5), and then one merits that his words be words of grace, and then his words and requests are received, like one who speaks words of grace, that the words enter into the heart of the one who is being requested, i.e. the one that he is requesting from. And this is the idea of ת(the letter TaW), i.e. through the cheit and the nun being joined and tied and the aspect of chen /grace being made -- through this is made the idea of TaW [ת = נ + ח], which is a term for engraving and impression, as is written (Eze. 9): "w’hiTWita TaW/and mark a sign," for through the grace is engraved and impressed a place in the heart of the requested one to receive the request, for through the grace his words for received. Hence, the aspect of the chen engraved a place in the heart of the requestee, in order that his words should enter into his heart, and his request be received; and the engraving and the impression are like taw as mentioned above. And this is [the meaning of] (Eccl. 9): "The words of wise men are heard in quiet (נחת/NaChaT." נחת specifically, i.e. like the חן/chen mentioned above and the ת/Taw mentioned above:
And therefore Ya`akov -- who is the idea of intellect as mentioned above -- therefore he merited to grace, as is written (Gen 33): "Because Elohim has dealt graciously with me" etc. And therefore he blessed the tribes with grace, as is written (there): "The children which Elohim has graciously given" etc. And Binyamin was not born yet, and therefore Yosef [later] blessed him with grace, as is written (there, 43): "Elohim be gracious unto you, my son." And specifically Yosef was able to bless him with grace, for Yosef was the most made up from the essense of Ya`akov, as is written (there, 37): "These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph…" for he was the essence of his generations, for "Ya`akov and Yosef are counted as one" [Zohar]. And therefore it is said of Yosef (Deut. 33): "B’khor shoro (his firstling bullock), hadar lo (majestic is he)." B’khor/Firstling is like the intellect as mentioned above, and this is [why it is expounded] that shoro[related to a word for vision]/bullock is a term for gazing, for one must look at the intellect that there is in every thing as mentioned. And this explains: “majestic is he;’ Onkelos renders it “radiance is his,” a term for light," for the intellect shines for him in every thing; even in a place that was darkness and gloom, the intellect shines for him, when one merits to look at the intelligence that exists there in every thing, and draws him closer to Hashem Yithbarakh:
And this is the explanation of: That which Rabbah bar Bar Chana said: That wave that sinks a ship appears with a tzutzita d’nura chivarta/fringe of white fire at its crest, and they strike it [the wave] with clubs on which is engraven EHYEH ASHER EHYEH/I WILL BE [THE ONE] WHO WILL BE... (Baba Batra 73): Rashbam: a white fringe of fire at its crest: a white fire; it is an angel of harm.
The wave is the evil inclination. That sinks a SeFiNta/ship -- it is the grace and importance, [as in] the phrase "SaFuN and important" (Moed Katan 28), for the evil inclination wants to sink and subdue, God forbid, the aspect of the grace and the importance of Israel, the aspect of the Malkhut D’Kedushah. And appears with a white fringe of fire at its crest — for initially the evil inclination clothes itself in mitzvot and misleads the man as if urging him to do a mitzvah. And this is the idea of tzutzita d’nura chiwarta, a white fire; even so, it is a harmful angel. And they strike it with clubs on which is engraven "EHYEH ASHER EHYEH" etc., i.e. the main way to suppress the evil inclination is through the Torah, which is all names of the Holy One, blessed-be-He. And the Torah is like waw (ו=6), for the Tablets -- six [cubits] is their length and six is their width (Baba Batra 14). And this is the idea of the club, i.e. sticks, that are engraven on them "I AM... ,” i.e. names, standing for the Torah, which is like waw. And the waw is the form of a stick, and she (the Torah) is all names of Hashem Yithbarakh, i.e. that the Torah of Holiness, she suppresses the evil inclination, which wants to make a man really insane, God forbid, for a sinner is insane, as our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Sotah 3): No man commits a sin, unless a spirit of folly enters into him. And as with the insane people, [that] they must beat them and place on them (holy) names -- just like that, the Torah that they involve themselves in is like sticks and names, with which they strike and suppress the evil inclination, and drive out from the man the insanity and the spirit of folly that is entered into him, as in and they strike it with clubs on which is engraven names etc. as mentioned above:
And this is [the explanation of]: "Ashrei temimei darekh, haholkhim be'Torat Hashem." (Ashrei) is a term for gazing. "TeMimei darekh/Perfect way" is like (Gen 25): "Ya`akov [was] a ish TaM/a wholesome man," who is the idea of the intellect as mentioned above. I.e. to merit to look at the intellect that there is in every thing -- which is the idea of Ya`akov the wholesome man -- this they merit through the Torah.
And this explains: "…who walk in the Torah of Hashem," for through his learning Torah with vigor, through this he gives strength to the Malkhut D’Kedushah, like נו"ן, to receive from the intellect, which is like חי"ת, and then is made grace (חן), and his words are received as mentioned above, and then is the grace and primacy of Israel go up, and all the prayers and requests are received:

Torah 2

Verbatim from our Rabbi of blessed memory
Vayomer Hashem el-Moshe, emor el-hakohanim benei aharon; ve'amarta aleihem, l'nefesh lo-yitama be`amav/And Hashem said to Moshe, Speak to the kohanim/priests, the sons of Aharon, and say to them, Let no (kohen) become ritually impure (via contact) with a (dead) person (when there are others) among his people (who can tend to the burial). (Lev. 21)
(Zohar Terumah 2:177): It is brought in Sifra d'Tzni`uta (Book of the Hidden, an appendix to the Zohar): Mashiach (Messiah) draws his breath of life from Nuqva D’fardasqa [Nostrils (of Arikh Anpin, the external partzuf/configuration of keter/Crown in Adam Kadmon/Primordial man)]
1. The only main weapon of Mashiach is prayer, which corresponds to the ChoTeM/nose, as it is written (Isa. 48:9): "u'tehilati eCheToM-lakh/for my praise I will restrain [My anger] for you." And that is where the root of his vitality is. And all the wars and all the conquests that he shall conquest — all is from there, as it is written (there, 11:3): "va'haRICho be'yirat Hashem/And he shall be enlivened with the fear of Hashem" etc.; this is like the chotem [ReIaCh = smell; RUaCh=spirit], and this is his main weapon, as is written (Gen. 45): "with my sword and with my bow (B'QaShti)." And Rashi explains: prayer and (BaQaShah)/request. And as written (Ps. 44): "Ki lo-beqashti evtach... b'Elohim hillalnu//For I will not place trust in my bow... In Elohim we boast," like "u'tehilati eCheToM-lakh."
2. And this weapon must be received by the way of Yosef, that is, keeping the brit/Covenant [particularly the brit Avraham, i.e. circumcision i.e. taharat mishpachah/family purity related matters], as written (there, 45): "Gird your sword upon your thigh." And as written (there, 132): "From the fruit of your belly will I seat upon your throne…" this is the aspect of Mashiach, like prayer. And "…if your children will keep My covenant" — that is, by the way of Yosef. And Yosef, who guarded the covenant, picked up the firstborn status, which is like the service of prayer*, which is like "double" (pi shnayim — two-mouthed) (Deut. 21:17), because prayer is two-edged. Two, since it has the praise of the Omnipresent, and asking of one’s needs. And it is like (Ps. 149): "A twoedged sword in their hand," which is like two mouths, like the idea of doubles. And he picked up [the firstborn status] from Reuben because he [Reuben] desecrated his father's bed/marital arrangements (Parashat Vayechi), because it [the firstborn status] depends on keeping the covenant.
* And therefore Yosef, because he merited the aspect of prayer, which is like "for my praise will-I-restrain-[My-anger] for you," which is like the life that is drawn from the nostrils as mentioned — therefore he is called "ben PoURaT Yosef" [a charming son is Yosef], Which is like the "TaRPU" lights [i.e., 400+200+80+6+1 = 687 lights], which are seven names: `AV, SaG, MaH, BaN, QSA, QNA, QMaG, which add up to Ta"RPU [687]; the lights receive from Nukva D’fardasqa, because FaRDaSQA adds up to Ta"RPU. [See Appendices]
3. And whoever merits this sword, must know how to wage war with the sword, not to sway it to the right or to the left, that it should be able to “strike a hairwidth and not miss” (Judges 20:16)
And this is impossible except by the way of mishpat/judgement, because mishpat is the central pillar (Tikunei Hazohar 17b), i.e. striking his weapon on the necessary place and not veering right or left, just in the middle. And this is like (Ps. 112): "sustains (y’KaLKeL) his affairs/words (devaraw) with mishpat." And because of this Yosef received the firstborn status specifically from Ya`akov, as is written (Gen. 48): "And as for me, I have given you" etc. — "I" specifically — because he [Yaakov] is the aspect of mishpat. This is like (Ps. 81): "For this is a choq/law for Israel…" — like the brit, as is written [in the blessing recited over circumcisions]: "A law (choq) in his flesh He placed” — “...a mishpat/judgement-day for the Elohim of Yaakov" — that is, that Yosef must receive this sword from the aspect of mishpat, in order to “sustain his words with mishpat.” And this is like (there, 72): "Give the king Your mishpatim," that the Mashiach should receive from the aspect of judgement.
4. And how does one merit the aspect of mishpat? Via tzedakah/charity, since by charity one holds the virtue of mishpat, as is written (Deut. 33): "he did tzidkat/what-is-righteous-for Hashem, and mishpataw/what-is-lawful with Israel;" and as in (Ps. 99): "[You do] mishpat and tzedakah in Ya’akov" etc. For tzedakah is attained via misphat, as is written (there, 75): "Elohim shofet/judges: he lowers this one, and lifts up the other," since he impoverishes one and enriches the other; and when one gives tzedakah, it is like "he lowers this one," since he lessens his money, and like "and lifts up the other," since he enriches the poor one. So we find that through this one holds the virtue of judgment. This is why one must give to tzedekah before the prayer (Bava Kama 10; Shulchan Arukh ‘O"Ch 72:10), so that he can “y’KhaLKeL/sustain his words with judgement,” and [be able to] “strike a hairwidth and not miss” (Judges 20:16). And this is [the reason] that our Sages of blessed memory said (Bava Kama 123): "Why did Ya`akov give the firstborn status to Yosef? — Because he sustained (KiLKeL) him." Compare this to a master, who raised an orphan in his home etc., as is written (Gen. 47): "And Joseph nourished (y’KhaLKeL) his father, and his brethren, and all his father's household, with bread, l’FI HaTaF/according to the children;" and like (Ezek. 21): "prophesy (HaTeF — connoting speech) southward." "l’FI HaTaF/according to the children," that is, that his Te’FILaH/prayer was fluent in his mouth/pFIw because of tzedakah; and through the tzedakah that he did, Ya’akov, who is the aspect of mishpat, gave him the firstborn status, which is like prayer, as is written: "And as for me, I have given you Shechem" — "I" specifically, he being the aspect of mishpat.
5. And the main cause of the outside thoughts [during prayer] — is the corruption of mishpat, for mishpat is the aspect of `AYNin/fountains/appearances/eyes, as is written (Gen. 14): "and they came to `AYN-mishpat (lit. the Fountain of Mishpat);" this is like (Deut. 33): "AYN Ya’akov/the fountain/appearance of Ya`akov." And via corruption of mishpat comes corruption to the eyes, as is written (Deut. 16): "for bribery blinds the eyes of the wise." This is like the outside thoughts during the prayer, which are "clouds covering the eyes" (Zohar Bamidbar 252), as is written (Lam. 3): "You have covered Yourself with a cloud" etc. But in the future, when the aspect of mishpat will be repaired, as is written (Isa. 1): "Zion will be redeemed in mishpat," then the clouds covering the eye will be caused to pass away, as is written (there, 52): "for eye to eye shall they see Hashem returning to Zion," and this is why Yosef is called (Gen. 49): "ben porat `alei `AYN/a charming son to the eye."
6. And everyone must aim in his prayer, that he should tie himself to the Tzaddikei Hador/righteous saints of the Age, because every Tzaddik Hador is an aspect of Moshe Mashiach (Moses-Messiah), as we have found, that the tzaddikim call each other "Moshe," as in [the saying of the sages]: "Moshe, you have said well." And Moshe is an aspect of Mashiach, as is written (Gen. 49:10): "Until Shiloh comes" — this is Moshe (Zohar I 25b) Mashiach (Onkelos, Rashi). And each and every prayer that everyone prays, is like a limb of the SheKhINah/Divine Presence, which are limbs of the miShKaN/Tabernacle, which no Israelite was able to put up piece to piece, each one in its place, except Moshe alone. And therefore it is necessary to bring and tie all the prayers to the Tzaddik Hador, as is written (Exod. 39): "And they brought the Mishkan to Moshe," and he knows how to put up piece to piece and make it a complete structure, as is written (there, 40): "And Moshe set up the Mishkan."
And all the Torah that a man learns to keep and do, all the letters are sparks of souls, and they are clothed inside the prayer, and are renewed there in the aspect of pregnancy *As is brought in Sefer Hagilgulim, that all the souls come into the Kingship in the aspect of pregnancy and are renewed there.And this is [the meaning of] (Ps. 19): "The heavens (haShaMaYiM) declare the glory of El," — which is the Torah, which is eSh u’MaYiM/fire and water, which is like souls, and they come into the prayer, which is like the “glory of El,” as is written (Ps. 66): "Make His praise glorious," like "for my praise will-I-restrain-[My-anger] for you." And the souls with the prayer are called KaVoD/glory, because it [prayer] clothes us, like Rabbi Yochanan called his clothes his “glorifiers” (Shabbat 113a); hence it [the souls and the prayer] is called the glory of El, and they light up each other: the souls light up the prayer in the aspect of raising Mayin Nukvin/ female waters, and the prayer lights up the souls like chidushim/new insights, because it renews them as in pregnancy, and the souls-clothed-in-the-prayer that are brought to the Tzaddik Hador are like (Ps. 45): "the virgins in her train who are her companions will be brought to You."
*Bava Batra 73b: Said Rabbah bar Bar Channah: One time, we were traveling on a ship, and we saw that fish with sand collected on its back, and grasses growing on it. We thought that it was dry land, and we went out and baked and cooked on it, and when its back grew hot, it turned over. And had not the ship been nearby, we would have drowned.'

And this is what Rabba bar Bar Chana [was hinting to], saying: *We saw that fish etc. Because in our exile it is as if the Holy Blessed One is hiding [His] face, as is written (Ps. 30): "If You would hide Your face," which is a symbol of compassion; but He has turned His back, which is like judgement. And all our prayers and requests about this, that He turned his back to us, are that He should return His face, as is written (there, 86): "O turn unto me," and as is written (Num. 6): "May Hashem shine His face." And when we see the length of the exile, and every day we call out to Him and are not saved, then there are those of our people the Israelites, that are mistaken, God forbid, in their hearts, that all the prayers go to waste. But in truth all the prayers — the Tzaddikim of each and every Age — they [the Tzaddikim] raise them [the prayers] and set them up, as is written: "And Moshe set up the Mishkan." And they raise up each and every piece to its place, and build the structure of the Shechinah little by little, until Its measure of structure is completed — then will come Mashiach, who is Moshe, and he will complete It and set It up in perfection. And this is the explanation of: See that fish — This is a symbol of the Tzaddik Hador, who is called "Fish," and this is a symbol of Moshe Mashiach; with sand collected on its back — these are the prayers, that we pray about His turning His back to us, as it were; collected — like "And they brought the Mishkan to Moshe," because it is necessary to bring and tie the prayer to the Tzaddik Hador; and grasses growing it — these are the souls that come with the prayer, like "the virgins in her train who are her companions,” etc., because the souls are called grasses, as is written (Ezek. 16): "I have caused you to increase as the tzemach/foliage of the field." And we thought that it was dry land — that the prayers do not bear fruit; but in truth it is not so — rather, we went out and baked and cooked on it — that is, all the prayers go out and go up, and the more they pray, the more the Shechinah is built and prepares Herself to mate. And this [is the meaning of] "we baked and cooked" because baking and cooking are preparations for eating, a symbol for mating, as is written (Gen. 39): "Except the bread that he ate." When the structure of the Divine Presence is completed — that is, through much prayer — His compassion will be aroused, and the attribute of din/harsh judgement will be reversed to the attribute of rachamim/compassion. And this [is the meaning of] when [its back] grew hot — that is, when His compassion will be aroused. ...Its back [grew hot,] it turned over — that is, that the trait of judgement will be reversed to the trait of compassion. And had not the ship been nearby — that is, "For My sake, for My sake I will do it” (Isa. 48). As is written in the Commentary (Vayikra Rabbah 27): "Who has anticipated Me, so that I should pay him?" — who has made Me a Mezuzah before I gave him a house? etc. One finds that all our good deeds and all the prayers — all is from Him, and it is not proper to think to receive reward for any thing, even though it seems that through our prayer and our Torah will be the Redemption — even so, we need His mercy, for it is in His mercy that He will redeem us. And this [is the meaning of] and if not for the closeness of the ship — this is a symbol of mercy, as our Sages of blessed memory said: "Most sailors are chasidim/kind" (Kiddushin 82a); if not for His mercy we would have drowned, God forbid, in the exile.
And this is the explanation of: Speak (EMoR) unto the Priests – [speaking] stands for prayer, as is written (Deut. 26): " You have selected (heEMaRta) Hashem this day." Priests stand for Torah, [which] stands for souls as mentioned above, as is written (Mal. 2): "For the priest's lips should keep knowledge... and Torah" etc. Aharon stands for mishpat, as is written (Ex. 28): "And Aharon shall bear the mishpat of the Children of Israel;" because it is necessary to bring all the prayers to the aspect of Moshe Mashiach, and he shall set up the Mishkan. And this is the [meaning of the] explanation of Rashi: l’haZHiR/warn/enlighten the adults regarding the little ones — that is, the Tzaddik Hador, who stands for Moshe the great light [Bava Batra 75a], shall enlighten (yaZHiR) and illuminate the prayer, which stands for the little light [Zohar II 238b]. And' '“Let no (kohen) become ritually impure (via contact) with a (dead) person (when there are others) among his people (who can tend to the burial) — i.e., via keeping the brit as mentioned above. As is brought in the Zohar: "The main drive of the yetzer hara/evil inclination in man is in regard to forbidden relations, and that is the main impurity." But when one guards the brit, he merits to the aspect of prayer as mentioned above, and merits to the aspect of "for my praise I-shall-restrain-[My-anger] for you," because smell depends mainly on purity, as our Sages of blessed memory said (Sotah 48): "After purity ceased, fragrance ceased [from fruits]," as the story in the Gemara illustrates (there, 49b), which said: "‘I [Rabbah] smell the fragrance of a juicy date.’ [R. Huna] said to him, ‘My son, there is purity in you.’"