Likutei Moharan
ליקוטי מוהר"ן
Likutei Moharan
https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Likutei_Moharan

Likutei Moharan

Introduction



A Pleasant Song



Go See







Torah 1



Section 1

Ashrei temimei darekh, haholkhim be'Torat Hashem/Fortunate are they whose way is perfect, who walk in the Torah/instruction of Hashem (Name of God, Y-H-W-H). (Ps. 119)
Know! Specifically via the Torah, all the prayers and all the requests that we request and pray are received. And the CheN/grace/favor and the chashivut/importance/primacy of Yisrael are raised and heightened for all who need, whether in spiritual [things or] in physical. Because now, due to our many sins, the true favor and primacy of Yisrael have fallen. 
Because now, the primacy and favor is mostly with the others. But by means of the Torah the grace and importance of Yisrael are raised, for the Torah is called: "ayelet ahavim v'ya`ALat CheN/a lovely ewe and a graceful she-ibex (Prov. 5:19), for she ma`ALah CheN/bestows grace on those who study her (Eruvin 54). And by means of this all the prayers and the requests are received:

Section 2

For the Israelite man must always look at the sekhel/intellect of every thing, and tie himself to the wisdom and the intellect that there is in every thing, in order that the intellect is in every thing should enlighten him to draw close to Hashem Yithbarakh, by means of that thing. For the intellect is a great light and shines for him in all his ways, as is written (Eccl. 8): "A man's wisdom makes his face shine." 
And this is the concept of Ya`AQoV, for Ya`akov merited to the firstborn status, which is reishit/head/foremost/beginning, which is the idea of Chokhmah/wisdom. As is written (Ps. 111): reishit chokhmah/the foremost [is] wisdom." And this is like "vaYa`AQ’Veni zeh pa`amayim/for he has hindered me these two times" (Gen. 27:36). Onkelos renders this: "veChaKMeni/for he has outwitted me," 
and this is the concept of the sun. For the intellect shines for him in all his ways like the sun. [And this is like "But the path of the righteous is as the light of dawn, that shines more and more unto the perfect day."] 
And this is the idea of ח [the letter CheIT] — which connotes life (ChIUT). For the wisdom and the intelligence are the life of every thing, as is written (Eccl. 7): "the wisdom preserves the life" etc.
However, since the light of the intelligence is very great, it is impossible to attain to it except by means of the aspect of נון [the name of the letter נ] which is the idea of Malkhut/kingship, as is written (Ps. 72): "lifnei-shemesh yiNnoN shemo/May he rule as long as the sun," and Rashi explained [yiNnoN as]: ‘A term for Kingship.’ 
And this is the idea of moon, because the moon, she has no light of her own, only what she receives from the sun (Zohar 3:238). And this is like Malkhut, which has nothing of its own, except what it receives from the cheit, which is like Chokhmah, which is like the sun as mentioned; "and the light of the moon will be as the light of the sun":
But whoever does not tie himself to the intellect and the wisdom and the life, that there is in every thing -- behaves like Esav who despised the firstborn status, as is written (Gen. 25): "So Esav despised his birthright"; that is, the intellect as mentioned above, like (Prov. 18): "A fool has no delight in understanding, but only that his heart may lay itself bare." And this is like the Wicked Malkhut, like the moon of the Other Side, of which is it said (Isa. 24): "Then the moon shall be confounded" etc. 
And this is like the good inclination and the evil inclination, for the good inclination is called "poor and wise" (Eccl. 4), like Malkhut, which is poor and lowly, for it has nothing of its own except what it receives from Chokhmah. And the evil inclination is called an old and foolish king (there), like the Malkhut of the Other Side, which desires not wisdom and intelligence, like "a fool has no delight in understanding" etc. as mentioned above. 
And it is necessary for everyone to give strength to the aspect of the Malkhut D’Kedushah (of Holiness), to overcome the Malkhut D’Sitra Achra (of the Other Side), as our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Berachot 5): "A man should always stir up the good inclination against the evil inclination." And how can he give strength to the Malkhut D’kedushah? -—through the Torah that he is involved with vigorously (as our Rabbis of blessed memory said there): "A man should always stir up" etc. "If it [the evil inclination] leaves, good, and if not, let him involve himself Torah"), and as our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Kiddushin 30): "If this corrupt one (the evil inclination) incites you, drag him to the Beit Midrash/house of study," 
for through the Torah one gives strength to the Malkhut D’kedushah. And then the Malkhut/נ, receives life from Chokhmah/ח, so the ח and the נ are connected and tied, and the light of the moon becomes like the light of the sun, "
and when one (side) rises the other falls" (Rashi, Gen. 25:23), so the Malkhut D’Sitra Achra falls and is anulled, as is written (Hos. 14): "For the ways of Hashem are right, and the just shall walk in them: but the transgressors shall fall in them." That is, through the ways of Hashem -- i.e. the Torah -- through this the righteous who are bound to the Malkhut D’kedushah, they are strengthened and receive strength through this. "But the transgressors shall fall in them," like the Malkhut D’Sitra Achra, like the evil inclination, which falls and is suppressed through the Torah as mentioned above:

Section 3

And through this are received all the prayers and requests, for the main reason why requests are not received -- is because the words have no chein /charm/grace/favor, and do not enter into the heart of the one that they are requesting from, as if there is no space in his heart so that the words should enter into his heart, because the requester has no grace so that the words should enter into the heart of the one that he is requesting from; 
but through the Torah, through which the ח and the נ are connected as mentioned above and חן/CheN/grace is made, and therefore the Torah is called ya`alat chen (Prov. 5), and then one merits that his words be words of grace, and then his words and requests are received, like one who speaks words of grace, that the words enter into the heart of the one who is being requested, i.e. the one that he is requesting from. 
And this is the idea of ת(the letter TaW), i.e. through the cheit and the nun being joined and tied and the aspect of chen /grace being made -- through this is made the idea of TaW [ת = נ + ח], which is a term for engraving and impression, as is written (Eze. 9): "w’hiTWita TaW/and mark a sign," for through the grace is engraved and impressed a place in the heart of the requested one to receive the request, for through the grace his words for received. 
Hence, the aspect of the chen engraved a place in the heart of the requestee, in order that his words should enter into his heart, and his request be received; and the engraving and the impression are like taw as mentioned above. And this is [the meaning of] (Eccl. 9): "The words of wise men are heard in quiet (נחת/NaChaT." נחת specifically, i.e. like the חן/chen mentioned above and the ת/Taw mentioned above:

Section 4

And therefore Ya`akov -- who is the idea of intellect as mentioned above -- therefore he merited to grace, as is written (Gen 33): "Because Elohim has dealt graciously with me" etc. And therefore he blessed the tribes with grace, as is written (there): "The children which Elohim has graciously given" etc. And Binyamin was not born yet, and therefore Yosef [later] blessed him with grace, as is written (there, 43): "Elohim be gracious unto you, my son." 
And specifically Yosef was able to bless him with grace, for Yosef was the most made up from the essense of Ya`akov, as is written (there, 37): "These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph…" for he was the essence of his generations, for "Ya`akov and Yosef are counted as one" [Zohar]. 
And therefore it is said of Yosef (Deut. 33): "B’khor shoro (his firstling bullock), hadar lo (majestic is he)." B’khor/Firstling is like the intellect as mentioned above, and this is [why it is expounded] that shoro[related to a word for vision]/bullock is a term for gazing, for one must look at the intellect that there is in every thing as mentioned. And this explains: “majestic is he;’ Onkelos renders it “radiance is his,” a term for light," for the intellect shines for him in every thing; even in a place that was darkness and gloom, the intellect shines for him, when one merits to look at the intelligence that exists there in every thing, and draws him closer to Hashem Yithbarakh:

Section 5

And this is the explanation of: That which Rabbah bar Bar Chana said: 
That wave that sinks a ship appears with a tzutzita d’nura chivarta/fringe of white fire at its crest, and they strike it [the wave] with clubs on which is engraven EHYEH ASHER EHYEH/I WILL BE [THE ONE] WHO WILL BE... (Baba Batra 73): Rashbam: a white fringe of fire at its crest: a white fire; it is an angel of harm.
The wave is the evil inclination. 
That sinks a SeFiNta/ship -- it is the grace and importance, [as in] the phrase "SaFuN and important" (Moed Katan 28), for the evil inclination wants to sink and subdue, God forbid, the aspect of the grace and the importance of Israel, the aspect of the Malkhut D’Kedushah. 
And appears with a white fringe of fire at its crest — for initially the evil inclination clothes itself in mitzvot and misleads the man as if urging him to do a mitzvah. And this is the idea of tzutzita d’nura chiwarta, a white fire; even so, it is a harmful angel. 
And they strike it with clubs on which is engraven "EHYEH ASHER EHYEH" etc., i.e. the main way to suppress the evil inclination is through the Torah, which is all names of the Holy One, blessed-be-He. 
And the Torah is like waw (ו=6), for the Tablets -- six [cubits] is their length and six is their width (Baba Batra 14). And this is the idea of the club, i.e. sticks, 
that are engraven on them "I AM... ,” i.e. names, standing for the Torah, which is like waw. And the waw is the form of a stick, and she (the Torah) is all names of Hashem Yithbarakh,
i.e. that the Torah of Holiness, she suppresses the evil inclination, which wants to make a man really insane, God forbid, for a sinner is insane, as our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Sotah 3): No man commits a sin, unless a spirit of folly enters into him. And as with the insane people, [that] they must beat them and place on them (holy) names -- just like that, the Torah that they involve themselves in is like sticks and names, with which they strike and suppress the evil inclination, and drive out from the man the insanity and the spirit of folly that is entered into him, as in and they strike it with clubs on which is engraven names etc. as mentioned above:

Section 6

And this is [the explanation of]: "Ashrei temimei darekh, haholkhim be'Torat Hashem." 
(Ashrei) is a term for gazing. 
"TeMimei darekh/Perfect way" is like (Gen 25): "Ya`akov [was] a ish TaM/a wholesome man," who is the idea of the intellect as mentioned above. I.e. to merit to look at the intellect that there is in every thing -- which is the idea of Ya`akov the wholesome man -- this they merit through the Torah. 
And this explains: "…who walk in the Torah of Hashem," for through his learning Torah with vigor, through this he gives strength to the Malkhut D’Kedushah, like נו"ן, to receive from the intellect, which is like חי"ת, and then is made grace (חן), and his words are received as mentioned above, and then is the grace and primacy of Israel go up, and all the prayers and requests are received:

Section 7



Section 8



Section 9



Section 10



Section 11



Torah 2



Section 1

Verbatim from our Rabbi of blessed memory. <br>Vayomer Hashem el-Moshe, emor el-hakohanim benei aharon; ve'amarta aleihem, l'nefesh lo-yitama be`amav/And Hashem said to Moshe, Speak to the kohanim/priests, the sons of Aharon, and say to them, Let no (kohen) become ritually impure (via contact) with a (dead) person (when there are others) among his people (who can tend to the burial). (Lev. 21).
(Zohar Terumah 2:177): It is brought in Sifra d'Tzni`uta (Book of the Hidden, an appendix to the Zohar): Mashiach (Messiah) draws his breath of life from Nuqva D’fardasqa [Nostrils (of Arikh Anpin, the external partzuf/configuration of keter/Crown in Adam Kadmon/Primordial man)]
1. The only main weapon of Mashiach is prayer, which corresponds to the ChoTeM/nose, as it is written (Isa. 48:9): "u'tehilati eCheToM-lakh/for my praise I will restrain [My anger] for you." And that is where the root of his vitality is. And all the wars and all the conquests that he shall conquest — all is from there, as it is written (there, 11:3): "va'haRICho be'yirat Hashem/And he shall be enlivened with the fear of Hashem" etc.; this is like the chotem [ReIaCh = smell; RUaCh=spirit], 
and this is his main weapon, as is written (Gen. 45): "with my sword and with my bow (B'QaShti)." And Rashi explains: prayer and (BaQaShah)/request. And as written (Ps. 44): "Ki lo-beqashti evtach... b'Elohim hillalnu//For I will not place trust in my bow... In Elohim we boast," like "u'tehilati eCheToM-lakh."

Section 2

2. And this weapon must be received by the way of Yosef, that is, keeping the brit/Covenant [particularly the brit Avraham, i.e. circumcision i.e. taharat mishpachah/family purity related matters], as written (there, 45): "Gird your sword upon your thigh." And as written (there, 132): "From the fruit of your belly will I seat upon your throne…" this is the aspect of Mashiach, like prayer. And "…if your children will keep My covenant" — that is, by the way of Yosef. 
And Yosef, who guarded the covenant, picked up the firstborn status, which is like the service of prayer*, which is like "double" (pi shnayim — two-mouthed) (Deut. 21:17), because prayer is two-edged. Two, since it has the praise of the Omnipresent, and asking of one’s needs. And it is like (Ps. 149): "A twoedged sword in their hand," which is like two mouths, like the idea of doubles. And he picked up [the firstborn status] from Reuben because he [Reuben] desecrated his father's bed/marital arrangements (Parashat Vayechi), because it [the firstborn status] depends on keeping the covenant.<br> And therefore Yosef, because he merited the aspect of prayer, which is like "for my praise will-I-restrain-[My-anger] for you," which is like the life that is drawn from the nostrils as mentioned — therefore he is called "ben PoURaT Yosef" [a charming son is Yosef], Which is like the "TaRPU" lights [i.e., 400+200+80+6+1 = 687 lights], which are seven names: `AV, SaG, MaH, BaN, QSA, QNA, QMaG, which add up to Ta"RPU [687]; the lights receive from Nukva D’fardasqa, because FaRDaSQA adds up to Ta"RPU. [See Appendices]

Section 3

3. And whoever merits this sword, must know how to wage war with the sword, not to sway it to the right or to the left, that it should be able to “strike a hairwidth and not miss” (Judges 20:16). 
And this is impossible except by the way of mishpat/judgement, because mishpat is the central pillar (Tikunei Hazohar 17b), i.e. striking his weapon on the necessary place and not veering right or left, just in the middle. And this is like (Ps. 112): "sustains (y’KaLKeL) his affairs/words (devaraw) with mishpat." 
And because of this Yosef received the firstborn status specifically from Ya`akov, as is written (Gen. 48): "And as for me, I have given you" etc. — "I" specifically — because he [Yaakov] is the aspect of mishpat. This is like (Ps. 81): "For this is a choq/law for Israel…" — like the brit, as is written [in the blessing recited over circumcisions]: "A law (choq) in his flesh He placed” — “...a mishpat/judgement-day for the Elohim of Yaakov" — that is, that Yosef must receive this sword from the aspect of mishpat, in order to “sustain his words with mishpat.” And this is like (there, 72): "Give the king Your mishpatim," that the Mashiach should receive from the aspect of judgement.

Section 4

4. And how does one merit the aspect of mishpat? Via tzedakah/charity, since by charity one holds the virtue of mishpat, as is written (Deut. 33): "he did tzidkat/what-is-righteous-for Hashem, and mishpataw/what-is-lawful with Israel;" and as in (Ps. 99): "[You do] mishpat and tzedakah in Ya’akov" etc. 
For tzedakah is attained via misphat, as is written (there, 75): "Elohim shofet/judges: he lowers this one, and lifts up the other," since he impoverishes one and enriches the other; and when one gives tzedakah, it is like "he lowers this one," since he lessens his money, and like "and lifts up the other," since he enriches the poor one. So we find that through this one holds the virtue of judgment. 
This is why one must give to tzedekah before the prayer (Bava Kama 10; Shulchan Arukh ‘O"Ch 72:10), so that he can “y’KhaLKeL/sustain his words with judgement,” and [be able to] “strike a hairwidth and not miss” (Judges 20:16). 
And this is [the reason] that our Sages of blessed memory said (Bava Kama 123): "Why did Ya`akov give the firstborn status to Yosef? — Because he sustained (KiLKeL) him." Compare this to a master, who raised an orphan in his home etc., 
as is written (Gen. 47): "And Joseph nourished (y’KhaLKeL) his father, and his brethren, and all his father's household, with bread, l’FI HaTaF/according to the children;" and like (Ezek. 21): "prophesy (HaTeF — connoting speech) southward." "l’FI HaTaF/according to the children," that is, that his Te’FILaH/prayer was fluent in his mouth/pFIw because of tzedakah; and through the tzedakah that he did, Ya’akov, who is the aspect of mishpat, gave him the firstborn status, which is like prayer, as is written: "And as for me, I have given you Shechem" — "I" specifically, he being the aspect of mishpat.

Section 5

5. And the main cause of the outside thoughts [during prayer] — is the corruption of mishpat, for mishpat is the aspect of `AYNin/fountains/appearances/eyes, as is written (Gen. 14): "and they came to `AYN-mishpat (lit. the Fountain of Mishpat);" this is like (Deut. 33): "AYN Ya’akov/the fountain/appearance of Ya`akov." 
And via corruption of mishpat comes corruption to the eyes, as is written (Deut. 16): "for bribery blinds the eyes of the wise." This is like the outside thoughts during the prayer, which are "clouds covering the eyes" (Zohar Bamidbar 252), as is written (Lam. 3): "You have covered Yourself with a cloud" etc. 
But in the future, when the aspect of mishpat will be repaired, as is written (Isa. 1): "Zion will be redeemed in mishpat," then the clouds covering the eye will be caused to pass away, as is written (there, 52): "for eye to eye shall they see Hashem returning to Zion," and this is why Yosef is called (Gen. 49): "ben porat `alei `AYN/a charming son to the eye."

Section 6

6. And everyone must aim in his prayer, that he should tie himself to the Tzaddikei Hador/righteous saints of the Age, because every Tzaddik Hador is an aspect of Moshe Mashiach (Moses-Messiah), as we have found, that the tzaddikim call each other "Moshe," as in [the saying of the sages]: "Moshe, you have said well." And Moshe is an aspect of Mashiach, as is written (Gen. 49:10): "Until Shiloh comes" — this is Moshe (Zohar I 25b) Mashiach (Onkelos, Rashi). 
And each and every prayer that everyone prays, is like a limb of the SheKhINah/Divine Presence, which are limbs of the miShKaN/Tabernacle, which no Israelite was able to put up piece to piece, each one in its place, except Moshe alone. And therefore it is necessary to bring and tie all the prayers to the Tzaddik Hador, as is written (Exod. 39): "And they brought the Mishkan to Moshe," and he knows how to put up piece to piece and make it a complete structure, as is written (there, 40): "And Moshe set up the Mishkan."

Section 7

And all the Torah that a man learns to keep and do, all the letters are sparks of souls, and they are clothed inside the prayer, and are renewed there in the aspect of pregnancy *<small>(As is brought in Sefer Hagilgulim, that all the souls come into the Kingship in the aspect of pregnancy and are renewed there)</small>.
And this is [the meaning of] (Ps. 19): "The heavens (haShaMaYiM) declare the glory of El," — which is the Torah, which is eSh u’MaYiM/fire and water, which is like souls, and they come into the prayer, which is like the “glory of El,” as is written (Ps. 66): "Make His praise glorious," like "for my praise will-I-restrain-[My-anger] for you." 
And the souls with the prayer are called KaVoD/glory, because it [prayer] clothes us, like Rabbi Yochanan called his clothes his “glorifiers” (Shabbat 113a); hence it [the souls and the prayer] is called the glory of El, and they light up each other: the souls light up the prayer in the aspect of raising Mayin Nukvin/ female waters, and the prayer lights up the souls like chidushim/new insights, because it renews them as in pregnancy, 
and the souls-clothed-in-the-prayer that are brought to the Tzaddik Hador are like (Ps. 45): "the virgins in her train who are her companions will be brought to You."<br> <small>[Bava Batra 73b: - <i>Said Rabbah bar Bar Channah: One time, we were traveling on a ship, and we saw that fish with sand collected on its back, and grasses growing on it. We thought that it was dry land, and we went out and baked and cooked on it, and when its back grew hot, it turned over. And had not the ship been nearby, we would have drowned</i>.]</small> 

Section 8

And this is what Rabba bar Bar Chana [was hinting to], saying: "We saw that fish" etc. Because in our exile it is as if the Holy Blessed One is hiding [His] face, as is written (Ps. 30): "If You would hide Your face," which is a symbol of compassion; but He has turned His back, which is like judgement. And all our prayers and requests about this, that He turned his back to us, are that He should return His face, as is written (there, 86): "O turn unto me," and as is written (Num. 6): "May Hashem shine His face." 
And when we see the length of the exile, and every day we call out to Him and are not saved, then there are those of our people the Israelites, that are mistaken, God forbid, in their hearts, that all the prayers go to waste. But in truth all the prayers — the Tzaddikim of each and every Age — they [the Tzaddikim] raise them [the prayers] and set them up, as is written: "And Moshe set up the Mishkan." And they raise up each and every piece to its place, and build the structure of the Shechinah little by little, until Its measure of structure is completed — then will come Mashiach, who is Moshe, and he will complete It and set It up in perfection. * 
And this is the explanation of: 
See that fish — This is a symbol of the Tzaddik Hador, who is called "Fish," and this is a symbol of Moshe Mashiach; 
with sand collected on its back — these are the prayers, that we pray about His turning His back to us, as it were; 
collected — like "And they brought the Mishkan to Moshe," because it is necessary to bring and tie the prayer to the Tzaddik Hador; 
and grasses growing it — these are the souls that come with the prayer, like "the virgins in her train who are her companions,” etc., because the souls are called grasses, as is written (Ezek. 16): "I have caused you to increase as the tzemach/foliage of the field." 
And we thought that it was dry land — that the prayers do not bear fruit; but in truth it is not so — 
rather, we went out and baked and cooked on it — that is, all the prayers go out and go up, and the more they pray, the more the Shechinah is built and prepares Herself to mate. And this [is the meaning of] "we baked and cooked" because baking and cooking are preparations for eating, a symbol for mating, as is written (Gen. 39): "Except the bread that he ate." 
When the structure of the Divine Presence is completed — that is, through much prayer — His compassion will be aroused, and the attribute of din/harsh judgement will be reversed to the attribute of rachamim/compassion. 
And this [is the meaning of] when [its back] grew hot — that is, when His compassion will be aroused. ...
Its back [grew hot,] it turned over — that is, that the trait of judgement will be reversed to the trait of compassion. 
And had not the ship been nearby — that is, "For My sake, for My sake I will do it” (Isa. 48). As is written in the Commentary (Vayikra Rabbah 27): "Who has anticipated Me, so that I should pay him?" — who has made Me a Mezuzah before I gave him a house? etc. One finds that all our good deeds and all the prayers — all is from Him, and it is not proper to think to receive reward for any thing, 
even though it seems that through our prayer and our Torah will be the Redemption — even so, we need His mercy, for it is in His mercy that He will redeem us. And this [is the meaning of] 
and if not for the closeness of the ship — this is a symbol of mercy, as our Sages of blessed memory said: "Most sailors are chasidim/kind" (Kiddushin 82a); if not for His mercy we would have drowned, God forbid, in the exile.

Section 9

And this is the explanation of: 
Speak (EMoR) unto the Priests – [speaking] stands for prayer, as is written (Deut. 26): " You have selected (heEMaRta) Hashem this day." 
Priests stand for Torah, [which] stands for souls as mentioned above, as is written (Mal. 2): "For the priest's lips should keep knowledge... and Torah" etc. 
Aharon stands for mishpat, as is written (Ex. 28): "And Aharon shall bear the mishpat of the Children of Israel;" because it is necessary to bring all the prayers to the aspect of Moshe Mashiach, and he shall set up the Mishkan. 
And this is the [meaning of the] explanation of Rashi: l’haZHiR/warn/enlighten the adults regarding the little ones — that is, the Tzaddik Hador, who stands for Moshe the great light [Bava Batra 75a], shall enlighten (yaZHiR) and illuminate the prayer, which stands for the little light [Zohar II 238b]. 
And' '“Let no (kohen) become ritually impure (via contact) with a (dead) person (when there are others) among his people (who can tend to the burial) — i.e., via keeping the brit as mentioned above. As is brought in the Zohar: "The main drive of the yetzer hara/evil inclination in man is in regard to forbidden relations, and that is the main impurity." 
But when one guards the brit, he merits to the aspect of prayer as mentioned above, and merits to the aspect of "for my praise I-shall-restrain-[My-anger] for you," because smell depends mainly on purity, as our Sages of blessed memory said (Sotah 48): "After purity ceased, fragrance ceased [from fruits]," as the story in the Gemara illustrates (there, 49b), which said: "‘I [Rabbah] smell the fragrance of a juicy date.’ [R. Huna] said to him, ‘My son, there is purity in you.’"

Torah 3



Section 1

Said Rabbah bar Bar Channah: I myself saw this aqruqta (frog) which was as (the size of) of the Fort of Hagronia. (Talmud says:) What is the size of the Fort of Hagronia? — Sixty houses. (Rabbah says:) There came a snake and swallowed the frog. Then came a pushqantza (female raven) and swallowed the snake, and went up and perched on a tree. Come and see how strong was the tree. (Baba Batra 73b, with Rashbam):
Behold! whoever hears song from an evil singer, it hinders his service of the Creator. But when he hears from a fit and worthy singer, then it benefits him, as will be explained. 
For behold, the voice of the song is drawn from the birds, as it says in the Midrash (Vayikra Rabbah 16): "Why is it that the leper -- his purification depends on two live, clean birds? Let the chatterer (the birds) come and atone for the chatterer (the leper). For he was stricken because of [his] voice that spoke slander." 
Hence, whoever is fit, his song is drawn from the two live, clean birds. And it is written in the Zohar (Vayikra 53), that the two birds mentioned above, nurse from the place that prophets nurse. This is why the singer is called ChaZzaN, a term for vision (ChaZzoN), i.e. a term for prophecy, for he takes the song from the place that the prophets nurse. 
But when the singer is wicked, then he takes his song from other birds that are in the qlipah (shells, evil forces). And it is written in the Zohar: "For the birds in the qlipah nurse from the breasts of Malkhut (kingship, see Appendix). And when midnight comes, such a cry goes out: "As the birds that are caught in the snare, so are the sons of men snared" (Eccl. 9:12). 
And the remedy, namely, that one should be able to hear song from any man, is through learning Oral Torah at night, i.e. Gemara, which is like night. As it says in the Midrash, "When Moshe was on the mountain forty days and forty nights, he did not know when was day and when was night, except by this: when he would learn Written Torah, he would know it was day, and when he learned Oral Torah, he would know it was night." 
Hence the Oral Torah is like night. As our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Sanhedrin 24), "He has set me in dark places," (Lam. 3:6) -- this is the Babylonian Talmud. And it is written: "and the darkness He called Night" (Gen. 1).
I.e. by studying the six orders [of the Mishnah] one rectifies the six rings that are in the windpipe, from which the voice goes out. And this is: "Arise, sing out in the night" (Lam. 2), i.e. that the song should be arisen/rectified, i.e. by means of the night which is Gemara of the six [Mishnaic] orders. 
But when one learns not for its own sake, i.e. in order to be called a rabbi, his learning is not worth so much. But when he learns at night, a cord of mercy is drawn to him and protects him, that that thought should not harm him:

Section 2

It says in the writings of the Ari of blessed memory, that the birds in the qlipah are the brains of the Malkhut of the qlipah. And the two pure and clean birds, they are the building of the Malkhut of holiness. 
Therefore David was [thus] praised in the presence of Shaul (Shmuel I 16): "who is skilled at playing," for playing is building the Malkhut, therefore he was fit for Kingship. And this explains the scripture about him (Ps. 78): "from following the nursing ewes He brought him," i.e. from following the nursing ones, i.e. Netzach and Hod [see Appendix]. For they nurse the prophets, and they are the construction of the Malkhut:

Section 3

And this explains what Rabbah bar Bar Channah said:
I myself saw this aqruqta -- and Rabbeinu Shmuel (Rashbam) explains: TzFaRDe`A (a frog), i.e. TziPpoR De`AH (bird of knowledge). 
Which was as (the size of) aQRA d’haGRONia (the Fort of Hagronia) — a term for "QRA b’GaRON" (cry out from the throat) (Isa. 58), i.e. since the song comes from it [the tzippor de`ah]. 
(Talmud says:) What is the size of the Fort of Hagronia? -- Sixty houses -- i.e. by means of what shall the aspect of "cry out from the throat" be remedied? Through sixty houses, i.e. through the sixty tractates [of the Talmud], and Rabbeinu Shmuel explained: "The Talmud says this, i.e. that one should study Talmud:" 
(Rabbah says:) There came a snake and swallowed the frog -- And Rabbeinu Shmuel explains: “Rabbah says this,” i.e. through learning not for its own sake, the snake shall swallow it. And this is why Rabbeinu Shmuel commented, “Rabbah said this,” i.e. because of learning in order to be called "Rabbi." 
Then came a pushqantza — and Rabbeinu Shmuel explained: a raven, i.e. through learning at night, since [`OreV, raven] is a term similar to [`ARVit,] night. And swallowed it (the snake) -- i.e. (the study of Torah at night) 
shall protect him from the snake mentioned above: 
<i>And went up and perched on a tree</i> -- Maharsha explains: which is like Avraham, of whom it is written (Gen. 21): "And he planted a tamarisk tree," which is like kindness, i.e. that the cord of mercy that is drawn to him shields him from the snake mentioned above. 
Come and see how strong was the tree -- i.e. Rabbah wonders to himself, that His mercy was so strong on us, that it can protect us even from this:

Section 4

And with this the juxtaposition of the Mishnah can sit well (Pirkei Avot 1): "Get yourself a Rabbi, acquire yourself a friend, and be someone who judges all man to the pan of merit" — 
for through hearing the song as mentioned above, he remedies the construction of his Malkhut. 
And this is: "Get yourself a Rabbi," i.e. that the aspect of Malkut should be remedied, and this is via "acquire (Q’NeH) yourself a friend," i.e. through QaNeH (windpipe), that the voice comes out of it, 
that he joins the two Cherubim face to face "as the embrace of a man and his consort," when Israel does the will of the Omnipresent. 
And then, when his aspect of Kingship is repaired, he can rule over whatever he wants, and he can kill this and give life to that, and hence the world could be ruined, and therefore it said: "and be someone who judges all man to the pan of merit," that it is necessary to judge every man to the pan of merit, for Hashem Yithbarakh, does not desire the ruin of the world, because “He did not create the world for desolation, rather for inhabitation did He form it” [Isa. 45:18]:

Section 5

And for this reason it is common in the mouths of people now to say, that the chazzanim are fools, and they are not knowledgeable people. For now the Malkhut of holiness is in exile. And therefore the song, which is drawn from the place of prophets, from the aspect of brains and knowledge of the Malkhut of holiness, and now that the Malkhut is in exile, therefore the song is blemished, and therefore the chazzanim are without knowledge, for they do not have power now to draw song from its root in holiness, which is like brains and knowledge of the Malkhut of holiness, as mentioned above. 
But in the future, when the Malkhut of holiness is raised up, and will be "Hashem as King over all the world," then song will be raised and completed as in knowledge of the Kingship of holiness, from where song is drawn, as mentioned. 
And this is: "For Elohim is the King of all the earth; sing praises in a skilful song;" for then, when Hashem will be king over all the earth and the Malkhut of holiness shall be raised up, then "sing praises in a skilful song," i.e. the chazannim and the singers shall be in knowledge and in intelligence through the Malkhut of holiness’s going up, and they shall receive song from its root in holiness, which is like knowledge and brains of the Malkhut of holiness:
<small>Addendum to the above:</small> 

Section 6

And this is: "For Your mercy is great above the heavens" (Ps. 108). Heavens is like voice, as is written: "From the heavens You made Your voice heard;" for through the mercy, i.e. the aspect of the “cord of kindness” that is drawn down by learning Torah at night, through this the voice is remedied, as mentioned, and is " For Your mercy is great above the heavens," as mentioned:

Section 7

The two birds of holiness, from where the prophecy is drawn, are the construction of the Malkhut of holiness, and therefore the appointment of a king was through prophecy, like all the Kingship of the house of David, which was through prophecy. And the prophecy is drawn from the Cherubim, which are like the two birds mentioned above, which are like building of the Malkhut of holiness as mentioned above:

Section 8

"From following the nursing ewes he brought him," i.e. from following the nursing ones, for they nurse the prophets etc. as mentioned above. And this is "from following the nursing ewes," i.e. King David, rest in peace, was able to repair and to raise up even song that was not from a fit person, and to raise it up to holiness. 
And this explains "from following the nursing ewes He brought him," i.e. even the song which was from the backsides of the holiness, like "from following the nursing ewes," from following the nursing ones, for the song of holiness is from the place that prophets nurse, and the song that is not in holiness is like "from following the nursing ewes," from the backsides of the holiness, and King David, rest in peace, was able to repair this song as well, and through this the Malkhut was raised up as mentioned above. And this is: "From following the nursing ewes He brought him to feed Jacob his people" etc.; for through this he merited to Kingship as mentioned above.

Section 9



Torah 4



Section 1

Verbatim from Rabbeinu of blessed memory:<br>I AM Hashem [Y-H-W-H] your Elohim, Which have brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of slavery. (Ex. 20:2):
1. When a man knows that all the things that happen to him to him are for his good, this aspect is like the World to Come, as is written (Ps. 56): "When [God treats me] with [the attribute of the Merciful] Hashem (a name connoting kindness and mercy) I will praise [Him] for the thing; and when [He treats me] with [the attribute of the justice-upholding] Elohim (“God” or “Power over all Powers,” a name connoting strict justice and judgement) I will praise him for the thing" [Berakhot 60b; Eyn Yaakov]. 
And this aspect is like the World to Come, as our Sages of blessed memory said (Pesachim 50): "On that day shall Hashem be one, and His name one." — and they argued: And now is He not one? And our Sages of blessed memory resolved: Now, one recites the blessing upon the good events, "Who is good and beneficent," and on the bad events "the Truthful Judge." But in the future it shall all be "Who is good and beneficent," that the name Hashem and the name Elohim shall be one unity:

Section 2

2. But this aspect is impossible to attain except when one raises the aspect of the Malkhut (Kingship) of holiness from exile among the nations. For now the Malkhut and the rule is by the nations, and for this reason their idolatries are referred to as “Elohim,” [“You shall have no other Elohim besides me.” (Ex. 20)] for they nurse from the aspect of Malkhut, which is called Elohim, as is written (Ps. 74): "Elohim is my King of old;" and when one raises the aspect of Malkhut from among the nations, then is fulfilled: "For Elohim is the King of all the earth" (there 47):

Section 3

3. And it is impossible to return the Kingdom to Hashem Yithbarakh, except through verbal confession before a Torah sage (talmid khacham), and through this he repairs and raises the aspect of Malkhut to its root. 
And this is the explanation of (Hos. 14): "Take with you words (DeVaRim)..." —this is verbal confession, this is like Malkhut, like "One spokesman/leader (DaBaR) per generation" (Sanhedrin 8). DaBaR is a term for leader and ruler — "...and return to Hashem" — that we should repair and raise up the words, the aspect of Malkhut, like Elohim, to Hashem, i.e. as mentioned above, like "When he treats me as Hashem I will sing praise for the thing; when he treats me as Elohim I sing praise for the thing," i.e. that one should know that all things that happen to him, they are all for his good and he shall say the blessing upon all things "Who is good and the beneficent:"

Section 4

4. And when one knows all this, it is called complete knowledge, for the essence of knowledge is the unity of lovingkindnesses and strengths — this is called knowledge, i.e. that one should not partition between mercy and judgement, and should bless upon all of them "Who is good and beneficent." And this is called "Hashem, one, and His name, one," as our Sages of blessed memory said, that in the future there shall be complete unity, that it shall all be "Who is good and beneficent." 
And this is: Hashem, one, and His name — this is like Elohim, Kingship, as is written (Sam. II 8): "And David got him a name:" One (אחד=13) in gematria [see Appendix: Gematria] equals love (אהבה=13),
i.e. whether it is Hashem which is mercies, or whether it is His Name which is like Elohim, like judgement — it is all for his good because of the love that Hashem Yithbarakh, loves you, as is written (Prov. 3): "For whom Hashem loves He corrects." And the scripture (Amos 3): "You only have I known of all the families of the earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities."

Section 5

5. And the sins of a man are upon his bones, as is written (Eze. 32): "but their iniquities shall be upon their bones," and every sin has a permutation of letters. And when one commits some sin, then an evil permutation is engraved on his bones, and through this he puts the aspect of the speech of this prohibition that he transgressed into the impurity, i.e. he puts the aspect of Malkhut, which is like "one spokesman per generation" — he puts it into the nations, and gives them rule. 
For example, if he transgressed the speech of the prohibition "You shall have no [other Elohim]..." then he destroys the good permutation of the speech and builds an evil permutation, and this permutation is engraved on his bones and takes vengeance on him, as is written (Jer. 5): "Your iniquities have turned away these things." And the scripture (Ps. 34): "Evil shall slay the wicked." 
But through spoken confession go out from his bones the letters engraved upon them, and from them is made the speech of confession, for the speech goes out from the bones, as is written (there 35): "All my bones shall say;" and he destroys the bad structure and permutation, and builds from them the Malkhut of holiness.
And this is [the explanation of] what our Sages of blessed memory said (Sotah 7): "While Israel walked in the desert, the bones of Yehudah were rolling, until Moshe said: "Hear, Hashem, the voice of Judah," since Moshe asked of Hashem Yithbarakh, that He should recall upon Yehudah the confession that he confessed, and so it was. And this is why specifically his bones were rolling, as in "but their iniquities shall be upon their bones," and through confession they were remedied and went up each one to its place. 
And Yehudah is like Malkhut; this is a clue, that the aspect of Malkhut is repaired through spoken confession, 
and this is done through Moshe, since Moshe recalled the confession. For so it must be, that the confession should be before a Torah sage, and every Torah sage is like Moshe, as they said: "Moshe, you have spoken well." And in this, that Moshe recalled the confession, it becomes as if he confessed now before Moshe, and through this is repaired the aspect of Malkhut, and the evil permutation is destroyed that was engraved on his bones.

Section 6

6. And this is like returning the Malkhut to its root, for the root of Malkhut is fire, as our Sages of blessed memory said (Sanhedrin 101): Why did Nebat err? — he saw fire issuing from his member. And the Torah is called fire, because from it is Malkhut, as is written (Jer. 23): "Is not my word like as fire?" And the written (Prov. 8): "By me kings reign," and the essence of Torah is Torah sages, as our Sages of blessed memory said (Makkot 22): "How foolish are those who stand up before a Torah scroll and do not stand up before a rabbinical scholar."
And this is [the explanation of] (Num. 31): "And every [metal thing] that is used over fire, you shall make it go through the fire," Thing/DaVaR -- is like Malkhut, which is drawn into the impurity, into the heat of the [evil] inclination, as in (Kiddushin 81): "the fire of `Amram." You shall make it go through the fire — its repair is through fire, i.e. through spoken confession before a Torah sage as mentioned above. 
And this is the root of the word `AVeRah (transgression), since the permutation of the `AVeRah passes (`OVeR) into his bones from side to side (m`EVeR l`EVeR). But mitzvah (commandment) is a term for connection. When one makes bundles and bundles of commandments (Midrash Rabbah Acharei 21), then his bone fragments get connected, as is written (Ps. 34): "He keeps all his bones"

Section 7

7. And this is the explanation of (Prov. 16): "The wrath of a king is as messengers of death" for the wrath of Hashem Yithbarakh is because of the Malkhut/kingship, that one cast down by his sins; "but a wise man will pacify it," i.e. the Torah sage, like Moshe, shall make atonement for him, as is written (Mic. 7): "and passes by the transgression of the remnant" — of one who considers himself as remnants (Rosh Hashanah 17). 
Hence, when he comes before the Torah sage and brings out all his permutations before the Torah sage, and the Torah sage is like Moshe, who considers himself like remnants, as is written (Num. 12): "Now the man Moses was very humble;" and through this he is called a wise man, as is written (Job 28): "But wisdom shall be found from nothingness" (see Sotah 21). And in this the Torah sage has power to appease, as is said: "but a wise man will pacify it."
And because of this, when Moshe prayed concerning the sin of the Calf, he said (Ex. 32): "Yet now, if you will forgive their sin — ; and if not, blot me, I pray;" for it is from the [realm of] impossibility, that a man should not have some haughtiness, when he hears his praise told; all the more so when a great king praises and glorifies the man, then it is certainly from the impossible, that he should not have some haughtiness. But one needs for this the nullification of all his feeling and materiality; then the man can hear his praise, and he will not have any haughtiness, like Moshe Rabbeinu, who saw it written in the Torah: "And Hashem spoke unto Moshe,” “And Hashem said unto Moshe;" and Israel reads every day in the Torah the praise of Moshe, and he himself tells them his praise; and Moshe did not have any glory or haughtiness from this, as is written: "Now the man Moses was very humble," and certainly through his humility there was power in the hand of Moshe to atone the sin of the Calf, as is written: "but a wise man will pacify it." 
And this is what Moshe argued: "And if not," i.e. if You will not forgive their sin, by this You show that I do not have such humility, that I could atone for them the sin of the Calf, therefore I asked: "blot me, I pray" in order that I should not stumble in pride, since I see and hear all the time the telling of my fame and my praise in the Torah, for who can stand in this, that he should hear the telling of his praise and not be proud, if he is not greatly humble; and if I am humble, then You need it that You should forgive their sin, as is written: "and passes by the transgression of the remnant" etc.:
And this is: (Deut. 33) "And he was king in Yeshurun," i.e. the kingship went up to its root, as is written (Ps. 37): "But the meek shall inherit the earth," and earth is the law of the kingship, as is written (Job 20): "and the earth shall rise up against him:"

Section 8

8. And this is [the explanation of] what our Sages of blessed memory said (Sotah 21) in: 
Parable of a man who is walking in the middle of the night and darkness, and is afraid of thorns, pits, thistles, wild beasts and robbers, and also does not know the road in which he is going. If a lighted torch is prepared for him, he is saved from thorns, pits and thistles; but he is still afraid of wild beasts and robbers, and does not know the road in which he is going. When, however, dawn breaks, he is saved from wild beasts and robbers, but still does not know the road in which he is going. When, however, he reaches the crossroads, he is saved from everything.
For this is known, that all the bad attributes and their derivatives are drawn from the four elements, from the four biles, as brought in Mishnat Chasidim: Depression and its derivatives are drawn from the inanimate, evil lusts and their derivatives are drawn from the vegetable, wasteful words and their derivatives are drawn from the animal, pride and its derivatives are drawn from the speaking; 
and whoever wants to walk in the holy way, must break all the evil traits and shall tell before the Torah sage, i.e. spoken confession, and the Torah sage shall lay out and select for him a way according to the root of his soul.
And there are three aspects in approaching tzaddikim, through which three roads everything is repaired. And these are the three aspects:
The first aspect, is when one sees the Tzaddik, as is written (Isa. 30): "but your eyes shall see your teachers;" and this aspect annuls the bad traits, that are drawn from the two elements inanimate and vegetable, i.e. depression and its derivatives and evil lusts, for the Tzaddik of the generation is called Mother, because he nurses Israel in the light of his Torah, and the Torah is called milk, as is written (Song 4): "honey and milk are under your tongue." And this we see tangibly, when an infant is sad and lazy, when he sees his mother he awakes in great haste towards his mother, i.e. to his root. Also we see tangibly, when a child is busy with his things of nonsense, even though he has great lusts for this, despite this when he sees his mother, he throws all his lusts behind his shoulders and draws himself to his mother. Hence, the evil traits of the two elements inanimate and vegetable are annulled through seeing the face of the Tzaddik. 
And this is: and is afraid of thorns – which is like the vegetable; and pits – which is like inanimate. If a lighted torch is prepared for him – this is the Torah sage, who is ablaze in the light of the Torah, and through this he is saved from evil traits of the two elements inanimate and vegetable, and so he is saved from the thorns and from the pits.
The second aspect, is the tzedakah that one gives to the Torah sage, through which he is saved from the evil traits of the two elements animal and speaking, which are like the wild beasts and robbers, which are wasteful words and pride and their derivatives, for through wasteful words and slander comes poverty, as is written (Ex. 4): "for all the men are dead" – this is poverty. Also regarding pride they said (Kiddushin 49): "A sign for presumptuousness is poverty," but through charity one becomes rich, as our Sages of blessed memory said (Gittin 7): "`Though they be in full strength and likewise many, even so shall they be sheared off and he shall pass away/pass over…’ (Nahum 1:12) Explanation: If a man sees that his livelihood is barely sufficient for him, he should give charity from it, and all the more so if it is plentiful. What is the meaning of the words, 'Even so they shall be sheared and he shall pass'? — In the school of R. Ishmael it was taught: Whoever shears off part of his possessions and dispenses it in charity is delivered from the punishment of Gehenna. Picture two sheep crossing a river, one shorn and the other not shorn; the shorn one gets across, the unshorn one does not. ‘…And though I have afflicted you…’ Mar Zutra said: Even a poor man who himself subsists on charity should give charity. ‘…I will afflict you no more…’ R. Joseph learnt: [Heaven] will not again show him signs of poverty." 
And this is: When, however, dawn breaks, he is saved from wild beasts and robbers. Dawnbreak hints to charity, as is written (Isa. 58): "when you see the naked, that you cover him... then shall your light break forth as the morning." Hence, through charity one is saved from evil traits of the two elements animal and speaking, which are like the evil beast and robbers.
The third aspect, is when one confesses spoken confession before the Torah sage, through which the Torah sage directs him on a straight path according to the root of his soul, 
and this is: "he reaches the cross-roads," and our Sages of blessed memory said (Sotah 21): “[Cross-roads] is the Torah sage, and the day of death,” — this alludes to spoken confession before the Torah sage; “the day of death” alludes to confession, as our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Sanhedrin 43): "Whoever is sentenced to death performs confession," and this is called a crossroads (PaRaShat DeRaKhim), for the Torah sage defines him a way (maPhRiSh lo DeReKh) according to the root of his soul, 
then “he is saved from all of them,” for before he confessed, even though he was by the Torah sage and gave him money, yet he did not know which road he was on, for "There is a way which seems right unto a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death” (Prov. 14), but when he arrived at the crossroads, which is a Torah sage and “the day of death,” i.e. spoken confession before a Torah sage, then “he is saved from all of them.”

Section 9

9. And this applies every time when one comes to a Torah sage and tells before him all his heart, and the Torah sage is like Moshe, who is like nothingness, as is written: "But wisdom shall be found from nothingness." And through this you are included in the Infinite. 
And this is like: "Zarka [a cantillation mark for Torah reading, where the voice is thrown from a lower to higher pitch], since it is thrown back to the place that it was taken from," since you shall return the Malkhut to the Infinite One, which is the desire that is in all desires. For the Malkhut, which is like the letters of speech, each and every letter has clothed in it the will of Hashem Yithbarakh, since the will of Hashem Yithbarakh, was that this letter should have such an image, and another letter, should have another image. Hence, the wills, i.e. the images of the letters, are the revelation of his Kingship, blessed be his Name, and all these wills, i.e. the images, are drawn from the will of the Infinite One, in whom is no image, 
and all the things and the existence in the world are from the letters, i.e. from Malkhut, for existence is because of the Malkhut, since Hashem Yithbarakh, wanted that His Kingship should be revealed in the world, and through this He created the world from nothingness to existence; and all the desires, i.e. the images, and all the existence, i.e. the aspect of Malkhut, receives its life from the will of the Infinite One, as they said (Megillah 31): Wherever you find the greatness of the Holy One, blessed-be-He, there you find his humility, i.e. the will of the Infinite One. 
And this is like putting off the materiality, for when one wants to include oneself in the will of the Infinite One, he must annul his existence. 
And this is that which is written in the Zohar (Yitro, page 84), that the passing away of Moshe was on Shabbat at the time of Minchah, which is the time of revelation of the Ra`awah d’Ra`awin [Aram.] (Will of Wills), which is like the will of the Infinite One, from which all the wills receive their life. And this is because Moshe annulled all his existence, as is written (Ex. 16): "and what are we." 
This is the explanation of: And he buried him in a valley (Deut. 34) — this is like nothingness, as is written (Isa. 40): Every valley shall be exalted; in the land of Moab this is like Malkhut, as David comes from Moab, since Moshe passed away into the Infinite, into the Will of Wills, into the Ra`awah d’Ra`awin, which is like the will of the Infinite that is clothed in the wills, in the images of the letters, in the aspect of Malkhut, as they said: Wherever you find His greatness, i.e. Malkhut, like wills, there you find the will, the Will of the Infinite One. 
And this is [the explanation of]: over against Beit-Pe`or, for our Sages of blessed memory said (an anecdotal explanation brought in Tosefot Sotah 14): "Why was it called Pe`or? Because it opens wide its mouth," for when one blemishes in Malkhut, then it has power to open wide its mouth in evil permutations; but Moshe, who repaired the aspect of Malkhut, through this Pe`or did not have the ability to open wide its mouth. And this is [the explanation of]: but no man knows –- even Moshe did not know, as our Rabbis of blessed memory said (Sotah 14), for he was annulled in the Infinite. 
And all this was in his death, but certainly also in his life he had putting off of materiality, and would cleave himself to the light of the Infinite. But the putting off was like: "And the living creatures ran and returned;" for the Holy One, Blessed be He, wants our service, as is written: "but You desire praise from bodies of dust, from lumps of clay." And because of this one must not remain so (extendedly annulled), only until the time when the Holy One, blessed-be-He, himself comes and takes up his soul. 
And this is that which we see, that sometimes a man flames up inside during prayer and says several words in great ardor, this is by the pity of Hashem upon him, that the light of the Infinite is opened to him and shines for him; and when a man sees this sparking, even though he does not see, his mazal (guardian angel) sees (Megillah 3), immediately his soul flames up to great cleaving, to cleave itself to the light of the Infinite, and according to the measure of the revelation of the Infinite, according to the count of words that were opened up and sparked up — all these words he says in great cleavage and in great devotion of soul in nullification of his powers, and when he is annulled against the Infinite, then he is like: but no man knows — even he himself does not know of his [own knowledge]. But this aspect must be "running and returning," in order that his existence should endure. 
Hence, when he is like "and returning," then he must reveal also to his mind. For at first, at the time of cleaving, the knowledge was annulled, as is written: but no man knows; but when he is like "and returning," when he returns (to his mind) to his existence, he returns to his mind; and when he returns to his mind, then he knows the unity of the Infinite and His goodness, and then there is no difference between Hashem and Elohim, between the trait of judgement and the trait of mercy, 
for to the Infinite One do not apply, God forbid, a variation of will, for the variations are only in variations of the images. But through the cleaving of a man to the Infinite, where there is no variation of will — for there is simply will, and afterwards there remains in him his impression from this unity and afterwards he becomes like "and returning" — then his impression shows to the mind, that it should know that it is all good and all one. 
And this is [the explanation of] what Moshe said to his generation (Deut. 4): "It has been clearly shown to your da`at/knowledge that the [Merciful] Hashem, He is the Elohim [of judgement];" for Moshe corresponds to ayin/self-nullification [i.e. humility, which generates wisdom (see Job 28:12 and commentaries)], and his generation that cleaved to him, it was proper for them to have da`at/knowledge, i.e. to illuminate the da`at regarding the Ein Sof/Infinite — the Ra`awah d’Ra`awin — "Hashem, He is Elohim:"

Section 10

And this is the explanation of: 
Said Rabbah bar Bar Channah: Once we were travelling on board a ship and saw a kawra (fish) in whose nostrils a mud-eater had entered (and the fish died). And the water cast it up, and threw it upon the shore. Sixty towns were destroyed thereby, sixty towns ate therefrom, and sixty towns salted [the remnants] thereof, and they filled from one of its eyeballs three hundred kegs of oil. On returning after twelve months time, we saw that they were sawing rafters from its bones with which to rebuild those towns: <small>[<b>Rashbam:</b> Kawra — a fish. Mud eater — a small creeping thing. In whose nostrils — the creeping thing entered into the nostrils of the fish. And the water cast it up — the water cast it up and threw it onto dry land, in the way of the sea, which does not tolerate a dead thing. Sixty towns were destroyed thereby — since the water threw onto sixty towns and broke all of them, since it was so big. Sixty towns ate therefrom — while it was still moist. And sixty towns salted [the remnants] thereof — other towns, which were far from there, salted from it and took it to their place. From one of its eyeballs — from its eyeball they took three hundred kegs of oil. They were sawing — to rebuild from the bones of the fish those same cities that it leveled.]</small>
And the explanation: 
A ship (sefinah) — is a term for importance, like Malkhut, since Rabbah bar Bar Channah sought with his intelligence to investigate the Malkhut and how mankind could elevate it. 
And saw a kawra (fish) — Israel are named fish, as is written (Gen. 48): "and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth." 
In whose nostrils a mud-eater had entered — this is like the prayer of Israel, as is written (Isa. 48): "For my praise will-I-restrain-[My-anger] (eCheToM [like ChoTeM, nose]) for you;" since a creeping thing, i.e. impurity, got mixed with his prayer and service and confused him, and this Israelite man was not able to perform his service completely. What did this man do? He performed the three aspects mentioned above, i.e. tying oneself to the Tzaddik and giving charity and spoken confession.
And this is the explanation of: 
And (the fish) died and the water cast it up, and threw it upon the shore; now he mentions the three aspects from top to bottom: 
And (the fish) died — this alludes to spoken confession, as they said: "Whoever is sentenced to death performs confession;" 
And the water cast it up — this alludes to charity, as is written (Eccl. 11) "Cast your bread upon the waters," and the scripture (Isa. 32): "Happy are you that sow beside all waters;" 
And threw it upon the shore — the Tzaddik is called "shore (GoDa)," a term for fence (GaDer), since he fences the breaches of Israel (Eze. 22, Isa. 58), and this is: "And threw it upon the shore," since he drew himself close to the Tzaddik. 
And through these three aspects: 
Sixty towns were destroyed thereby — since through the “death,” i.e. the spoken confession, he raised the Malkhut from among the Sitra Achara (Other [Evil] Side), and the Tzaddik shows him the straight way, 
as is written in the Haftarah of Bereishit (Isa. 42): "I will destroy mountains and hills..." — hinting to destruction of the rule of the nations, "And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not" — this is like the Tzaddik showing him a straight way; this is like a crossroads, as mentioned above, and "sixty towns" hints to rise of the Malkhut, of which it is written (Song 6): "There are sixty queens (melakhot)." 
And sixty towns ate therefrom hints to the two evil traits of animate and speaking [kingdoms], through which comes poverty as mentioned above, but through charity one repairs them and draws down the flow (of livelihood). And this is [the explanation of]: they ate from it. And sixty towns hints to the aspect of sixty mighty ones, from which [aspect of strength/gevurah] comes livelihood, as they said: "gevurot geshamim (strengths/judgements of rains/materiality)" (Berakhot 33, Ta`anit 2, see there) 
And sixty towns salted [the remnants] thereof — this hints to repair of the two evil traits, inanimate and vegetable, through his drawing close to the Tzaddik, for the Tzaddik is "a covenant [brit] everlasting like salt” (Num. 18:19) [Brit can refer to the covenant of Abraham, i.e. circumcision, i.e. guarding family purity, which is the characteristic of a Tzaddik]. Also depression and lusts come from foul blood, but through salt one extracts the bad bloods, and "sixty towns" clues to the sixty letters in the Priestly Blessing, which are in the hand of the Tzaddik, as is written (Prov. 10): "Blessings are upon the head of the righteous."
And they filled from one of its eyeballs three hundred kegs of oil. Kegs of oil — allude to da`at/knowledge, for "holy anointing oil" (Ex. 30) alludes to seikhel/intellect. 
And "three hundred," this is like Moshe, who is like the Tzaddik diminishing himself in the aspect of "what" [MaH, similar to MEaH, one hundred] — in three aspects it is necessary to diminish oneself, as is written (Jer. 9): "Let not the wise man... mighty man... or rich man glory." Hence, in each aspect from these three aspects he is made "what," 
and through this he has putting off of materiality, and clings to the light of the Infinite, where there is no variation of will, rather “Hashem, He is Elohim” as mentioned above, i.e. it is all "the Good and the Beneficent." And this is like one eyeball, as brought down in the Idra (Nasso 137): "And in the future there will be the One Eye of Compassion [in how God supervises the world]." This corresponds to “it shall all be ‘Who is good and beneficent.’" 
Hence, when the Tzaddik makes himself "what," he cleaves himself to the one eye of compassion, i.e. to the Infinite; and afterwards, when he returns, as in running and returning, then he draws down from the light of the Infinite the unity of the will that extends there through his "what," and from "what (MaH)" is made "hundred (MeaH)," as they said: "Do not read it as what (MaH), but hundred (MeaH)," and from the three MaH are made three MeaH, and he draws this light to his da`at and intellect, i.e. "kegs of oil," which alludes to intellect as mentioned above. 
"It has been clearly shown to your daat," since he draws down the light of the Infinite to his mind, that he should know the unity, that “Hashem, He is Elohim,” and should bless "the Good and the Beneficent" upon everything, as in the future to come.
On returning after twelve months time, we saw that they were sawing rafters from its bones with which to rebuild those towns. For behind the holiness — which is the Twelve Tribes, through which the Malkhut is repaired — behind is impurity. 
There are people who go out from the holiness. And this is what the Tannah (the Mishnaic scholar, i.e. Rabbah bar Bar Channah) told, that he paid respect and returned to inquire after these who are after twelve months time — those who are behind the Twelve Tribes of holiness, who go out from the community of Israel through their evil deeds. 
And he saw they were sawing rafters from its bones, i.e. through their evil deeds, engraved upon their bones, the engraving passes from side to side just like a saw mark. 
But through the Israelite man mentioned above waking up in repentance through the small creeping thing in his nostrils, by feeling a small impurity that confuses him, through his repentance he causes, that also these evil ones are made into a seat for holiness. 
With which to rebuild those towns — that [the evil ones] should also help those who serve God to build those towns, as mentioned.

Section 11

And this is the explanation of: 
I am the Hashem your Elohim — meaning, whether He is Hashem or whether Elohim, understand that all this is I, i.e. that you should fulfill: "When he treats me as Hashem I will sing praise for the thing; when he treats me as Elohim I sing praise for the thing," i.e. that all should be "Good and Beneficent" as mentioned above; 
Which have brought you out of the Land of Egypt, since it says in the commentary (Bereishit Ch. 16): "for all the exiles are named by the exile of Egypt (MiTZRaIM), since they afflict (M’TZeRIM) Israel," i.e. through the Tzaddik the kingship and rule of the nations are annulled, for through this the Malkhut of holiness goes up out of them, as mentioned above. 
From the house of slavery — this hints to nullification of the evil traits of the four elements which are named by the title "slaves," for all the four elements are under the moon orb, and the moon is called by the title "slave," as brought in the Zohar (Wayeshev 181): "’Behold, my slave will become intelligent’ — this is the moon," 
meaning through the Tzaddik the Malkhut goes up from the Other Side, and the evil traits are annulled, and through this the man comes to the aspect of the World to Come, to the aspect of: "When he treats me as Hashem I will sing praise for the thing; when he treats me as Elohim I sing praise for the thing:"

Torah 5



Section 1

Verbatim from Rabeinu of blessed memory: <br>Bachatzotzrot vekol shofar/On the trumpets and the sound of the shofar, hari`u lifnei hamelekh Hashem/shout out before the King, Hashem (Ps. 98).
1. Since each man must say, "The whole world was only created for me." (Sanhedrin 37) -- hence, insofar as the world was created for me, I must at all times see and look into tikkun olam/rectifying the world and to fill the lackings of the world and pray for them. 
And the matter of prayer is in two aspects: Before the 'gezar din'/decree of the judgement, one prays according to the [regular] order of the prayer, and it is not necesary to clothe the prayer; but after the gezar din, it is necessary to clothe the prayer, so that the 'mal'achim'/angels/messengers that stand on the Left will not understand and will not prosecute, as is written (Dan. 4): "בִּגְזֵרַת עִירִין פִּתְגָמָא/The matter is by the decree of the watchers..." -- i.e. after the gezar din, then -- "...[בְּ]מֵאמַר קַדִּישִׁין שְׁאֵלְתָא/and the edict [שְׁאֵלְתָא lit. question] is by the word of the holy ones," then the Tzadikim clothe their she'elah/question in a ma'amar/essay.

Section 2

2. But How do they discern between before gezar din or after gezar din? Via the mitzvot that we do, we can discern between before gezar din and after gezar din. 
And specifically when we do the mitzvot in such great joy that he does not want any reward of olam haba/Coming World, rather that he wants that Hakadosh Baruch Hu should send him another mitzvah in reward for this mitzvah, as our Sages of blessed memory said (Avot 4): The reward of a mitzvah is a mitzvah; because he enjoys from the mitvah itself. 
And this is the difference between the prophecy of Moshe Rabeinu and other prophets, as Rashi explained: "וַיְּדַבֵּר משֶׁה אֶל רָאשֵׁי הַמַּטּוֹת וְכוּ' זֶה הַדָּבָר אֲשֶׁר צִוָּה ה'/And moshe spoke ('diber') to the heads of the tribes... This is the 'davar'/word that Hashem commanded (Num. 30)." And Rashi explained: All the prophets prophesied with "B'cho amar Hashem.../so says Hashem"; Moshe is added on past them, for he prophesied with "Ze hadavar/this is the word." Because 'coh'/so is like a mirror that is not shiny, and "zeh hadavar" is like a shiny mirror. 
And these are the two aspects of prophecy that exist in the service of the Creator: There is a man, who does a mitzvah for the reward of Olam Haba, that he does not benefit from the mitzvah itself; if he were not given Olam Haba in reward for it he would not do it, and this is the aspect of "Koh," a not-shiny mirror, like a man who sees some thing from afar [28], so he does the mitzvah for the reward that comes at a distant time, i.e. after this world, 
and the payment of his reward is called "נביא/prophet," acrostic for: "יָבא בְרִנָּה נשֵׂא אֲלֻמּוֹתָיו/shall come with singing, carrying his sheaves..." 
and there in this verse is hinted the payment of reward: "הָלוֹךְ יֵלֵךְ וּבָכה נוֹשֵׂא מֶשֶׁךְ הַזָּרַע/One who goes walking and crying, carrying along the seed" (Ps. 126), for he has grief in its performance, "בּא יָבא בְרִנָּה נשֵׂא אֲלֻמּוֹתָיו/shall come coming in song, carrying his sheaves," that he will rejoice in the future, when he receives the reward of the mitvah, acrostic of בּ'א יָ'בא בְ'רִנָּה נ'שֵׂא אֲ'לֻמּוֹתָיו, acrostic for נָבִיא. 
But the phophet, who prophecies with "Zeh Hadavar," whose desire is not the reward of the mitzvah, rather desires the mitvah in itself, for he so much rejoices in doing it, that he is repulsed by any kind of reward. 
And this is the aspect of navi/prophet i.e. payment of reward, in the aspect of "zeh hadavar," in the aspect of the shiny mirror, like a man who sees a thing from close with beautiful and pure vision, so likewise he enjoys from the mitzvah in itself, and his reward is 'neged einav'/before his eyes. 
And whoever is on this level, that he does a mitzvah in such great 'simchah'/joy that he does not desire any reward of Olam Haba for it -- he can know whether it is before gezar din or after gezar din, 
for the mitzvot are a 'qoma shelema'/complete structure[29], and they give life to all the 'qomot'/structures, whether the structure of man [soul], or structure of the world [space], or the structure of the year [time], for space, time and soul receive life from the mitzvot, as is written (Ps. 33): "And all His works are [sustained] by 'emunah'/faith;" and the scripture (ibid. 119): "All your mitzvot are emunah;" and Hakadosh Baruch Hu is simple unity with the mitzvot, 
and when the deed and Hakadosh Baruch Hu are in proper replair and worder, then Hakadosh Baruch Hu rejoices in them and delights in them, as is written (ibid. 104): "Hashem will rejoice with his works," like someone who does a work, who makes some object, and the object is beautiful, then he rejoices in it; and the joy of Hakadosh Baruch Hu is clothed in the mitzvot, for they are his unity, 
and whoever does the mitzvah in joy from the mitzvah in itself, hence, when he enters the simchah that is in the mitzvah, he enters the simchah of Hakadosh Baruch Hu, who is rejoicing in his works, and this is like (ibid. 149): "Let Israel rejoice with its Maker." 
Hence, when there is some affliction or judgement in the space-time-soul then surely the it reduces from the joy of Hakadosh Baruch Hu, as is written (Gen. 6): "And it grieved His heart;" and as they said (Sanhedrin 46): "What does the Shechinah say? 'My head hurts' etc.," 
and this person who enters into the joy can surely know according to the matter of the joy, if it is before gezar din or after gezar din. He can also know on what part of the structure the judgement is decreed, for he knows according to the structure of the mitzvot: If he cannot perform of the heads of the mitzvot, i.e. mitzvot that depend on the head, he knows that the judgment is decreed on the heads of space-time-soul, and likewise with the remaining structure of the mitzvot. 
And this is that which our Rabbis of blessed memory said <small>(Mechilta, and see Beitza 16)</small>;regarding Shabbat: "'Remember' it [Shabbat] from Sunday, i.e. the joy and pleasure of Olam Haba, which is the aspect of Shabbat, he should feel during the six workdays, which are aspect of doing the mitzvot, in which speace-time-soul were created. 
[And this is:] <small>(Deut. 24)</small> "Give his wages on the same day," that his payment should be from the mitzvah in themselves, "...and do not let the sun set on it," that that he should not do the mitzvot for reward of Olam Haba, which is after his sun sets, after his death.

Section 3

3. And joy is mainly in the heart, as is written (Ps. 4): "You gave joy in my heart." And it is impossible for the heart to rejoice, until he removes the crookedness in his heart, that he should have straightness of heart, and then he will merit to simchah, as is written (Ps. 97): "And gladness for the streaight of heart." 
And the crookedness of the heart is shed via thunders, as our Sages of blessed memory said (Berakhot 59): "Thunder was only created to shed crookedness in the heart." And thunders are aspect of voice that a man emits vigorously in his prayer, and from this thunder is created, 
for it is brought in the Zohar (Pinchas daf 235): "כַּד קָלָא נָפִיק וְאַעֲרָא בְּעָבֵי מַטְרָא אִשְׁתַּמָּע קָלָא לְבִריָּתָא וְדָא אִינוּן רְעָמִים/When a voice goes out and hits a raincloud, a voice is heard by creatures, and this is thunder." And thunder is rooted in gevurot/strengths/strictures/mighty deeds, as is written (Job 26): "וְרַעַם גְּבוּרוֹתָיו מִי יִתְבּוֹנָן/but the thunder of His mighty deeds, who can understand?" 
And because of this we say the berakhah on [hearing] the chatzotzrot and voice of shofar "...שֶׁכּחוֹ וּגְבוּרָתוֹ וְכוּ'/that [the world is filled with His power and mighty deeds]." And the gevurot/mighty deeds are aspect of power and gevurah/strength, for the man emits the sound with great force, and this sound hits the rainclouts, i.e. aspect of brains, from which "טִפִּין טִפִּין/droplets by droplets" go down, as written in the Zohar (Pinchas daf 235): "בְּאֵר מַיִם חַיִּים וְנוֹזְלִים מִן לְבָנוֹן/a well of living waters, and flowing streams from Lebanon" (Song 4) -- from the white of the brains. 
And when it hits the rainclouds, then the voice is heard לְבִריָּתָא/by creatures, i.e. aspect of thunders, and this is [Ps. 77] "קוֹל רַעַמְךָ בַּגַּלְגַּל/the voice of Your thunder is in the galgal/spheroid" i.e. in the skull of the brain; when it encounters the skull of the brain from the voice are produced thunders, and it is heard by Creation. 
And this is [Ps. 49]: "פִּי יְדַבֵּר חָכְמוֹת/My mouth will speak wisdoms..." i.e. the speech that goes out of my mouth will meet chokhmah/wisdom i.e. the skull of the brain, and thereby "...וְהָגוּת לִבִּי/and the contemplation of my heart" etc. i.e. via the thunder being aroused, the heart is aroused, as they said: The voice arouses one's direction [see Berakhot 24b...], 
and this is that which our Sages of blessed memory said (Berkhat 6): "Whoever has awe of Heaven, his words are heard," for whoever has awe, his voice is made thundrous, for thunder is from sitra d'Yishak/the side of Yitzchak [Zohar Pinchas 235], as is written: "and the thunder of his mighty deeds," and via this his words are heard, i.e. mishtam`a qala livriyata/the voice is heard by creatures, for that is what hearing depends on (Zohar Pinchas 230, and in Tikun 70), as it says (Hab. 3): "Hashem, I heard a report of You and feared." 
And this is the explanation [of] (Ps. 103): "Mighty [men] of strength who perform His word, hearing the voice of His word;" it is brought in the Zohar (Lekh daf 90): "They are fortunate to hear report of voices from on high" i.e. via the gevurot/strengths are made thunders, and via this the heart hears, and i.e. "וְהָגוּת לִבִּי תְּבוּנוֹת/and the contemplation of my heart shall be understanding;" and as written (I Kings 3): "Give Your servant a hearing heart;" and his words will also be listened to by creatures, and this is: "...hearing the voice of His word," 
and this is the aspect of the sound of the shofar; this is the shofar of the ram, the ram of Yishak (Zohar Pinchas 235b), the aspect of "But the thunder of His mighty deeds." 
And this is (Ps. 89): "Fortunate are the people who know the teru`a/shofar-shout" -- "know" specifically, that the voice should hit the brain, the aspect of rain clouds, and it should be in the aspect of thunder, as is written [in the prayer of Mussaf of Rosh Hashanah]: "In voices and lightnings You were revealed to them, and in the voice of a shofar You appeared to them," that with the voice of the shofar He appeared to them more than with voices and lightning.

Section 4

4. But one must empty the brains from extraneous wisdoms and from foreign thoughts. From chametz, that he should not sour his wisdom with extraneous wisdoms and with cravings, in order that he can bring out his voice and it hit his brain, [and thunder] will be made from it; but when the skull of the brain is sealed with impurity, as is written (Lev. 11): "and you become contaminated with them;" then his voice is not heard...

Part II



Additions from Manuscript

