Ohr Yisrael
אור ישראל
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ohr Yisrael

Introduction

The Rambam, of blessed memory, in Chapter 3 of his Eight Perakim write, and these are his words, those that came before us said that the Nefesh has health and sickness like the body has health and sickness, and the health of the Nefesh is that its character/attributes exist, etc.

Shaarei Ohr







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Now let us return and see what would be the first cause to have a person be aroused to examine his actions and meditate introspectively during the month of Elul (this matter is relevant to the whole year, in that it touches upon His service, may His name be blessed) - is it not the case that he has no natural desire for this, as [he does] with earthly matters? Our early rabbis - Eden is their rest - trembled about this thing. They relied upon the Pirkei deRabbi Eliezer and instituted the blowing of the shofar in Elul; and it became the first cause for someone to be aroused from his sleep and from the vanities of his slumbers to examine his actions. It is like the statement of the verse (Amos 3:6), "When a ram’s horn is sounded in a town, do the people not tremble?" 
However it is known that an effect is only created by a cause similar to it. A weighty effect will not come out of a light cause!
And with this thing, the blowing of the shofar was the first cause for someone who was immersed, both inside and out, in His service, may His name be blessed. So a light cause could arouse him to examine himself in a more lofty way. But what can we say or speak? What can be done now when we are immersed, both inside and out, in the the vanities of earthly pursuits, and the heart is blocked and as hard as a solid boulder? Will the light arousal [of the shofar] in front of us make an impression upon the powerful rock? 

Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28









And that is why when they prayed for rain: Behold Rabbi Akiva's approach was like the way of Hilllel, to forego his reckonings [with others for their sins against him]. Hence he was answered from the Heavens measure for measure. However Rabbi Eliezer's approach was like the way of Shammai, so he would not forego his reckonings. Though it is true that he would receive much reward  about this - that which he did the will of God, may His name be blessed, according to his position; nevertheless, since he ultimately would not forego his reckonings, [for the Heavens to] forego the sins of the community would not have been measure for measure. And that is why he was not answered. So this is the meaning of the heavenly voice which said, "It is not because this one is greater than that one, but rather because this one forgoes his reckonings, etc." That is why he was answered, measure for measure, as just mentioned. 

Iggeret HaMusar



Netivot Ohr



Kokhavei Ohr

