The Jonathan Sacks Haggadah; Essays
פסח על שום מה? הגדת הרב יונתן זקס; מאמרים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/The_Jonathan_Sacks_Haggadah;_Essays
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Koren Publishers, Jerusalem, 2013
-https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH990035921980205171/NLI

The Jonathan Sacks Haggadah; Essays

The Story of Stories

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>Remember the earliest of days; grasp the years of generations that have been. Ask your father – he will tell you all; ask the elders of your kin and they will say.</i> (Deut. 32:7)</small></span>
The seder service on Pesaḥ is the oldest surviving ritual in the Western world, dating back some 3,300 years to the night, possibly in the reign of Ramses II, when the Israelites ate their last meal in Egypt, preparing for their journey to freedom. Certain features still remain from biblical times: the matza and maror, the reminder of the Paschal offering (a mere reminder until the rebuilding of the Temple), the questions asked by a child, and the explanations given by an adult. In some communities, especially Oriental ones, it is still the custom to dress as the Israelites did then, “your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand” (Ex. 12:11).
The seder is, of course, more than a ritual. It is an act of remembering, the telling of a story – the Haggada – and none has been more lovingly sustained. Each age has added something of its own. In the course of a single night, we encounter, as well as biblical passages, Hillel in the days of the Second Temple, the second-century sages at their seder in Benei Brak, the teachings of the <i>Amora</i>’<i>im</i> of the third and later centuries, poems by Yannai and Kalir from the post-talmudic period, an addition from Ashkenaz provoked by the terrible sufferings of the First Crusade, and children’s songs from medieval Germany. Every word we say has a history. Even the <i>Ma Nishtana</i>, the questions asked by a child, go back some two thousand years. The weaving together of these many contributions into a single narrative is the achievement of no ordinary author. It is the collective voice of the Jewish people through centuries and continents as it has encountered and responded to the word of God.
Through the Haggada more than a hundred generations of Jews have handed on their story to their children. The word <i>haggada</i> means “relate,” “tell,” “expound.” But it is closely related to another Hebrew root that means “bind,” “join,” “connect.” By reciting the Haggada, Jews give their children a sense of connectedness to Jews throughout the world and to the Jewish people through time. It joins them to a past and future, a history and destiny, and makes them characters in its drama. Every other nation known to mankind has been united because its members lived in the same place, spoke the same language, were part of the same culture. Jews alone, dispersed across continents, speaking different languages and participating in different cultures, have been bound together by a narrative, the Pesaḥ narrative, which they told in the same way on the same night. More than the Haggada was the story of a people, Jews were the people of a story.
During Israel’s early history – the biblical era – the Exodus narrative embodied their collective memory as a nation, forged in slavery and led miraculously to freedom. Not only was it the record of their past; it was their template of ideals for the future, their aspiration to create a society dedicated to liberty under the sovereignty of God. But its influence did not end with the collapse of Jewish sovereignty in Israel. If anything, during the long centuries when Jews were scattered throughout the world, its effect was more remarkable still. It sustained Jewish identity, linking one generation to the next through the bonds of shared memory. In times of suffering – and there were many – it kept hope alive, the hope expressed at the very beginning of the Haggada that though “now [we are] slaves, next year we shall be free; now we are here; next year in the land of Israel.” In ages of prosperity, it became a tutorial in mutual responsibility. It taught the great lesson of human solidarity, that we cannot enjoy the food of affluence while others eat the bread of oppression. We are not fully free if others are oppressed.
Nor was its influence confined to Jews. Through a long and circuitous route, the story of the Exodus eventually came to influence not only Jews but Western civilization as a whole. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, through such figures as John Locke and Thomas Jefferson, it gave rise to a new vision of freedom. It told of how a people might liberate itself from oppressive governments and construct a society in which “all men are created equal,” possessing inalienable dignity and collective freedom. It set forth a narrative, never surpassed, of the human drama as the long journey to redemption, not in heaven but on earth, in the structures of our common life. No story has had greater influence in inspiring revolution or evolution toward a just and humane society. It is the West’s great meta-narrative of liberty.
More remarkably still, in the nineteenth century it inspired a series of figures, some religious, others secular but moved nonetheless by the power of the ancient narrative, to set in motion a new exodus and homecoming of the Jewish people. It began with a new Egypt – the rise of racial anti-Semitism, followed by the Russian pogroms, then the anti-Jewish program of the Nazis, which moved inexorably to the Final Solution, the worst recorded crime of man against man. It culminated in a redemption more astonishing than any other in post-biblical history: the only time a people dispersed for two thousand years has returned to its land to begin its history again as a sovereign power. Speaking in the United Nations in 1947, David Ben-Gurion argued the case for the creation of the State of Israel and did so by referring to Pesaḥ and the Haggada:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Three hundred years ago a ship called the <i>Mayflower</i> set sail to the New World. This was a great event in the history of England. Yet I wonder if there is one Englishman who knows at what time the ship set sail? Do the English know how many people embarked on this voyage? What quality of bread did they eat? Yet more than three thousand three hundred years ago, before the <i>Mayflower</i> set sail, the Jews left Egypt. Every Jew in the world, even in America or Soviet Russia, knows on exactly what date they left – the fifteenth of the month of Nisan. Everyone knows what kind of bread they ate. Even today the Jews worldwide eat matza on the fifteenth of Nisan. They retell the story of the Exodus and all the troubles Jews have endured since being exiled. They conclude this evening with two statements: <i>This year, slaves. Next year, free men. This year here. Next year in Jerusalem, in Zion, in Eretz Yisrael</i>. That is the nature of the Jews.</span>
Thus history repeated itself, and a new chapter was written in the Jewish story of exile and homecoming more than three thousand years after the first. The story of the modern State of Israel, with its restoration of Jewish sovereignty; the ingathering of exiles from 103 countries, speaking eighty-two languages; the rebirth of Hebrew, the language of the Bible; and the rebuilding of Jerusalem, Israel’s ancient capital, exemplifies one of Judaism’s most hope-creating truths: that a vision can shape the destiny of a people. Ideas, if we live them, have the power to change the world.
The great message of Pesaḥ is that history is not what Joseph Heller once called it: “a trash bag of random coincidences blown open by the wind” (<i>Good as Gold</i>). It is, or can become, a journey toward a place where people are valued not for the wealth they own or the power they wield, but for who they are – a trace of God in a world that so often seems to deny His presence. In ways that remain obscure yet still majestic, a whole series of individuals – beginning with Abraham, culminating in Moses, and continuing through an almost unending sequence of prophets, visionaries, sages, saints, philosophers, poets, jurists, and commentators – was inspired by a vision of society in which simple acts, relationships, and lives could become vehicles of the Divine Presence.
As we sit around the seder table on Pesaḥ, rehearsing the journey from the bread of oppression to the wine of freedom, we commit ourselves to a momentous proposition: that history has meaning. We are not condemned endlessly to repeat the tragedies of the past. Not everywhere is an Egypt; not all politics are the exploitation of the many by the few; life is potentially something other and more gracious than the pursuit of power. Though we have not yet constructed the perfect social order, and though the messianic age with its reign of peace remains over the horizon, we are not wrong to travel in that direction, however long it may take before we reach our destination. In his <i>A History of the Jews</i>, Paul Johnson expressed as well as anyone has the nature of the Jewish journey:
<span class="poetry indentAll">No people has ever insisted more firmly than the Jews that history has a purpose and humanity a destiny. At a very early stage of their collective existence they believed they had detected a divine scheme for the human race, of which their own society was to be a pilot. They worked out their role in immense detail. They clung to it with heroic persistence in the face of savage suffering…. The Jewish vision became the prototype for many similar grand designs for humanity, both divine and man-made. The Jews, therefore, stand right at the center of the perennial attempt to give human life the dignity of a purpose.</span>
“The dignity of a purpose”: that remains, even today, a radical hope. Throughout history there has been no shortage of those who claim that ideals are illusions and hope a form of hubris destined to end in failure. Today that view is as likely to come from science (specifically “scientism,” the belief that science is all there is) as anywhere else. We are, on this view, a mere concatenation of chemicals, cosmic dust on the surface of infinity, living out lives that are no more than infinitesimal disturbances in a blind and purposeless universe that came into being for no reason, and for no reason will, billions of years from now, cease to be.
Judaism is now, as it has been since its earliest days, a protest against such despair in the name of humanity and of God, whose breath we breathe and whose voice, if we listen, we can still hear through the echoes of time. The universe is not blind to our hopes, deaf to our prayers. Somewhere at the core of being is a personal presence, a transcendental Thou, who created the world in love, brought us into being as a parent does a child, who spoke to Abraham and Sarah, asking them and their descendants to undertake a long and momentous journey, and who is with us on the way. Pesaḥ is the festival of faith, the faith of our ancestors, who followed that voice across the wilderness of space and time, in search of a freedom that honors the presence of God in the affairs of mankind.
Few texts have received more attention than the Haggada. There are thousands of commentaries, and more are published each year. Anyone who contemplates adding to this number must ask not “Why is this night different?” but “Why is this edition different?” My answer is that I wrote this commentary because, among all the many I have read, I could not find one that explained in their full richness and scope the fundamental themes of the Pesaḥ story: the Jewish concept of a free society, the role of memory in shaping Jewish identity, and the unique connection that exists in Judaism between spirituality and society, giving rise to what I have called elsewhere “the politics of hope.” Nor could I find a Haggada that told me in detail about the role of Pesaḥ in shaping Jewish identity through the millennia, or its influence on Western thought as a whole.
Traditional commentaries are usually close readings of individual words and phrases rather than reflections on the meaning of the whole. That is a classic Jewish response, and I have not hesitated (in the latter essays, and in the commentary on the text) to do likewise. In some of the essays (“The Sages in Benei Brak” is my personal favorite) I have tried to say things I have not heard before. That is the imperative of<i> ḥiddush</i>, finding the new in the old. But it is the great themes, the overarching principles, that are often neglected or taken for granted, and it is worth saying why.
Pesaḥ is an intensely political festival. It is about the central Jewish project: constructing a society radically unlike any that had existed before and most that have come into being since. It poses a fundamental question: can we make, on earth, a social order based not on transactions of power but on respect for the human person – each person – as “the image of God”? Pesaḥ, like Judaism generally, is not about <i>salvation</i>, a private drama of the soul, but about <i>redemption</i>, the life we share as fellow citizens under the sovereignty of God. It is about freedom, justice, equity, the ethics of the marketplace, and the responsible use of power to secure the common good. Before Plato’s <i>Republic</i>, Hobbes’ <i>Leviathan</i>, and Rousseau’s <i>The Social Contract</i>, the Exodus story pioneered a path to a just and gracious society. I believe that it embodies not only a more religious vision than these other works, but also a more humane one. At its heart is a never-surpassed idea: that the free God seeks the free worship of free human beings, and invites those who heed His call to become His coarchitects in creating what Rabbi Aharon Lichtenstein calls “societal beatitude.”
Much of the Hebrew Bible, spanning a period of almost two thousand years, is about how the people of the covenant wrestled with this challenge, sometimes succeeding, often failing, but never losing sight of the task, the call, the dream. The challenge, however, presupposed that Jews had political power – a land, a nation, a state, within which they could construct a free society that honored its members and served as an example and inspiration to others. That was never easy. Israel was a small country in a strategic location surrounded by great powers. It experienced many wars, internal tensions, and eventually a fateful split into two nations. In the sixth century bce the Babylonians conquered the remaining southern kingdom of Judah, destroyed the Temple, and took many of the people into exile. A generation later, some returned, and eventually the Temple was rebuilt. But after two disastrous rebellions against the Romans, in 66 and 132 ce, the Temple was destroyed again, Jerusalem lay in ruins, and the Jews faced their longest exile.
For eighteen centuries, between the destruction of the Second Temple and European emancipation, they were exiled, dispersed, and without political organization. Wherever they went, they ran their own communities, built impressive educational and welfare infrastructures, and adjudicated internal disputes, but they lacked sovereignty and civil rights. They had local autonomy, but as far as the politics of nations were concerned, they had neither vote nor voice. In neither Christian nor Islamic lands were they citizens. Until recently, therefore, the Pesaḥ story was a memory and a hope: a memory of one journey to freedom in the distant past, and the hope that it would happen again. “Now [we are] slaves; [but] next year….”
That prayer has begun to be answered. In Israel, Jews have recovered sovereignty and reentered the mainstream of history. In the Diaspora, wherever they live in pluralist, liberal democracies, they have both a vote and a voice. Inescapably, after a lapse of eighteen centuries, Jews have reentered the political arena. They can do so in two ways: by defending Jewish interests, or by articulating Judaic principles. With regard to the first, there is no essential difference between Jews and any other religious or ethnic group. Each fights for its rights and defends its space. With regard to the second, however, there is a very great difference. Jews have something distinctive to contribute to the public domain. They are the bearers of the oldest, and in many ways most remarkable, political vision in the West. In that sense, every Jew is heir to the ideals of Moses and the prophets. The Pesaḥ story is no longer – as it was for so many centuries – primarily about a distant past and an equally distant future. It is about the present and the values by which we should strive to live.
It is fair to say that Jewish religious thought has not fully caught up with this development. That is hardly surprising. Modernity confronted Jews as a series of traumatic onslaughts – first, the assimilatory demands of European emancipation, then the rising tide of racial anti-Semitism, then the nightmare of the Holocaust, and finally the challenge of forging a new nation in Israel under pressures, internal and external, that might easily have defeated a less hardy people. Distress, said the sages and Maimonides, inhibits prophecy, because it makes people turn in on themselves, rather than outward to the world and to God. But we must now begin to study Torah, and the Pesaḥ story in particular, in a new way, as shapers, rather than victims, of history. That means going back to first principles and a fresh encounter with the biblical narrative.
For the past few years I have been trying to study, teach, and write Torah in an old-new way. I call it <i>Torah veḥokhma</i>, “Torah and wisdom,” in contradistinction to certain other approaches. In nineteenth century Germany the favored phrase among disciples of Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch was <i>Torah im derekh eretz</i>, “Torah and general culture.” In the United States, the preferred principle was <i>Torah umada</i>, “Torah and science.” Neither of these rubrics is particularly helpful. <i>Torah im derekh eretz</i> is a quotation from the teachings of Rabban Gamliel III (third century ce), who used it to mean something else, “Torah together with a worldly occupation.” <i>Torah umada</i> is a modern coinage with no source in tradition. <i>Ḥokhma</i>, by contrast, is a biblical category. One book, Proverbs, is devoted to it, and several others – notably Job and Ecclesiastes – belong to what is generally known as the “wisdom literature.” <i>Ḥokhma</i> is a concept with many shades of meaning, but its primary sense is human wisdom as such: the universals of mankind’s intellectual quest.
<i>Ḥokhma</i> is the truth we discover; Torah is the truth we inherit. <i>Ḥokhma</i> is the shared heritage of mankind; Torah is the particular heritage of the Jewish people.<i> Ḥokhma</i> is the world of “is,” of fact; Torah is the world of “ought,” of command.<i> Ḥokhma</i> is where we encounter God through creation; Torah is how we hear God through revelation. The two are not equal in their significance to Jews – Torah is holy in a way <i>ḥokhma</i> cannot be – yet both are significant, for if we are to apply Torah to the world, we must understand the world to which it applies. Because the God of creation is also the God of revelation, there is ultimate harmony between them, even though, given the imperfections in our understanding of both, it may not be evident at any given moment. There must, I believe, be an ongoing conversation between them, for otherwise Torah will remain a closed system with no grip, no purchase, no influence on the world outside its walls. That was inevitable during the long centuries in which Jews and Judaism had no dialogue with the world outside, but it is neither inevitable nor desirable now. If we have reentered the political arena, as a nation-state in Israel and as citizens of liberal democracies elsewhere, we need the confidence and the language to recover our voice in the conversation of mankind, bringing our own distinctive truths to the public domain. Once we do so, we discover new strata of meaning in Torah itself. We also discover that Torah especially the Exodus narrative – has played a larger role than we suspected in guiding the West to create its own versions of a free society. –
The essays can be divided into three sections. The first is about the relationship between Pesaḥ, Jewish identity, and Jewish history – about the part the story has played in sustaining a people through the vicissitudes of time. The second is about Pesaḥ and its place in the Western political imagination. Most histories of political thought begin with the great thinkers of ancient Greece. It is my argument, however, that ancient Israel was where the idea of freedom was born, and in many respects it remains a surer guide to liberty than the short-lived democracy of Athens. In the third section I offer some new interpretations of the ancient texts.
I begin, however, with a personal reminiscence of an occasion when I had an unusual opportunity to say what the story of Pesaḥ meant to Jews and why it is, for me, the story of stories. It took place in Windsor Castle, home of Britain’s kings and queens and the oldest continuously inhabited castle in the world. In 2000 I was invited to deliver the St. George’s Lecture, an annual address in the presence of Prince Philip. As the first Jew to be accorded this honor, I thought hard about what to say. I thought of the history of Jews in Europe, driven for so many centuries from country to country without rights, power, or a home. I found myself thinking back across the centuries to an earlier and painful age in British history: the first blood libel in Norwich in 1144, the massacre in York in 1190, and the expulsion of the Jews by Edward I in 1290. Those events set a pattern that was to be followed in one European country after another during the following two hundred years. What would our ancestors, harried and afflicted, have said had they been able to foresee that one day one of their number would be invited back to the home of the king who had sent them into exile? I remembered a verse in the Book of Psalms, “I will speak of Your statutes before kings and not be ashamed” (119:46), and I was determined to be faithful to it.
I wanted to honor the memory of those Jews of an earlier age, to tell of their courage and tenacity and thus say something of what it meant and still means to be a Jew. In the course of my remarks I said this: “I try to imagine what it must be like to inherit a building like Windsor Castle. To live in such a place, so steeped in history, is to want to know that history – how this building came to be, and why. In the course of asking the question, I would learn about how it began, in the days of William the Conqueror, on the legendary site of King Arthur’s Round Table. I would discover that it had been added to, rebuilt, extended, and changed many times in the course of the ensuing centuries, by Henry II, Henry III, Edward III and their successors.
“Learning this history would be more than simply discovering facts. Because I had inherited the building it would be my history. I would not have chosen it. It would have chosen me. Inescapably, though, I would have entered into a set of obligations, a moral relationship with the past and future. I would be part of the story of the castle and its heirs. The very fact that it was still here, still dominating the landscape, part of the historic legacy of Britain, would tell me something of great significance to my life. I would slowly realize that generation after generation of the kings and queens of England had endeavored to preserve the castle and hand it on intact to future generations. They had vested their hopes in those who would come after them, that they too would do the same. And now that it had come to me, I would know beyond doubt that I too was morally bound to protect it, and that if I failed to do so I would have betrayed the trust of those earlier generations, as well as failing to honor my responsibility to England as a whole. The result would be that when disaster struck – as it did in the great fire of 1992 – I would know that I had to restore the damaged buildings, not necessarily exactly as before, but at least in keeping with the whole. That is what it is to live in the context of history.
“Jews,” I said, “will never own buildings like Windsor Castle. We are not that kind of people. But we own something that is, in its way, no less majestic and even more consecrated by time. The Jewish castle is built not of bricks or stone, but of words. But it too has been preserved across the centuries, handed on by one generation to the next, added to and enhanced in age after age, lovingly cherished and sustained. As a child I knew that one day I would inherit it from my parents, as they had inherited it from theirs. It is not a building but it is, nonetheless, a home, a place in which to live. More than it belongs to us, we belong to it; and it too is part of the heritage of mankind. What we have is not a physical construction but something else – a story.
“It was given to me by my parents when I was a child. I received it on the festival of Passover. It is an exceptionally moving story. It tells of how our ancestors were once slaves who, through a succession of wondrous events, were given their freedom. They then began a journey across the desert for forty years, and later through a wilderness of dispersion for two thousand years, in search of a home, a promised land, a place of grace and justice and freedom and dignity. Though at times the destination seemed to lie beyond the furthest horizon of hope, they did not give up. They never ceased to travel. And I am part of that journey. I did not choose to be, any more than the member of a royal family chooses to be born into royalty; but this is my legacy, my heritage. It defines who I am.
“I know, just as does the heir to a castle, that I am a link in the chain of generations, and that I owe a duty of loyalty to the past and to the future. That is what Edmund Burke had in mind when he called society a partnership ‘not only between those who are living but between those who are living, those who are dead, and those who are to be born.’ I am part of a story whose earlier chapters were written by my ancestors and whose next chapter I am now called on to write. And when the time comes, I must hand it on to my children, and they to theirs, so that the Jewish story, no less than Windsor Castle, can live on.”
That was the story I told that night, and it is the story each of us tells on the night of the seder. Its message, undiminished through the years, still has the capacity to inspire. It suggests that to be a Jew is to be part of a history touched, in a mysterious yet unmistakable way, by the hand of Providence. Jewry is not a mere secular people, an ethnic group, one of the myriad cultures in the anthropological lexicon of mankind. Had that been all there is to Jewish identity, there would be no Jews today. No culture or ethnicity has survived two thousand years of dispersion and minority status. Had the Israelites of ancient times not been moved by a religious vision, they would have assimilated among the Egyptians. Had they not carried the Torah with them into Israel, they may have won their independence, but they would today be numbered along with the Canaanites, Jebusites, Perizites, and the other peoples of the ancient Near East, now remembered, if at all, as exhibits in museums. We are who and what we are because of a momentous faith, the faith of which the Haggada is a supreme expression. We are a people touched by the Divine Presence.
Often, we are too little aware of the majesty and uniqueness of the Jewish heritage. Moses once said, in words of great wisdom, “It is not up in heaven…. Nor is it beyond the sea…. The word is very close to you; it is in your mouth and in your heart, waiting to be done” (Deut. 30:12–14). One of Judaism’s great insights is that religious truth is not exotic. It does not need to be sought far away in an ashram in India, or in a private ecstasy of the soul. No faith has worshipped a more transcendental God, but no faith has brought God so close. The <i>Shekhina</i>, the Divine Presence, lives in the very texture of everyday acts and relationships if we train ourselves to hear their music and open our eyes to their radiance. It is there in the beauty of the Jewish home, the resonance of our rituals, the drama and sweep of Jewish history, the sheer persistence of our people, and the determination of generation after generation of Jews to live their faith and hand it on to their children when they might so easily have done otherwise. And it began on Pesaḥ, when a much-afflicted people began its long journey across space and time in response to a divine call.
We are Jews to show ourselves and others what it is to bring the Divine Presence into ordinary lives, human relationships, marriage, the family, homes, and communities, and thus begin to build a society that honors the “image of God” in mankind, a society free in the deepest and most generous sense of the word. On Pesaḥ, as we trace our own route from the bread of oppression to the wine of freedom, we become part of that journey. Making it our own, we are drawn into a narrative at once intimate and vast, just like the seder service itself. This is our people and our story. Challenging then, it is no less challenging now.

A Tale of Two Civilizations

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>“I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth” [Gen. 13:16]. As the dust of the earth is from one end to the other, so your children will be dispersed from one end of the world to the other. As dust is trodden by all, so your children will be trod upon by the peoples of the world. As dust outlives all vessels of metal and endures forever, so other nations of the world will cease to be, while Israel endures forever.</i> (<i>Genesis Raba</i> 41:9)</small></span>
Travel to Egypt today and you can still see the great temples built by Ramses II, assumed by most scholars to be the pharaoh of the Exodus. Luxor, Karnak, Abu Simbel: they still stand, three thousand years later, in little less than their former glory, astonishing achievements that seem to defy time. Yet the civilization that produced them is no more. The Egypt of the pharaohs was one of the greatest and most long-lived empires of the ancient world, but already by the time of Ramses II it had reached its peak, and shortly thereafter began its long decline. By the time of Alexander the Great it was a shadow of its former glory, and it fell to the Greeks. Like other imperial powers, in its day it “bestrode the narrow world like a colossus” and then faded into oblivion. The monuments remain, but the culture that brought them forth was all too mortal.
Among the builders of those monuments were a small migrant people known to the Egyptians as Hebrews, <i>Ivrim</i>, meaning nomads, people who wander from place to place without a fixed home. In the late nineteenth century great interest was aroused by the discovery, in an Egyptian village known as El-Amarna, of a cache of some 350 clay tablets dating back to the fifteenth century bce. Written in Akkadian, they contained reference to a group known as <i>Habiru</i>, who seemed to bear some similarity to the Israelites of that time. They too were a nomadic group who appeared from time to time, arousing fears on the part of other residents in the land of Canaan. There is even a record, in the form of two papyri from the reign of Ramses II, of Habiru workers being employed to transport materials for the pharaoh’s construction projects.
Scholars today are less likely to identify the Habiru of the Amarna letters with the Hebrews of the Bible. The word appears to be not the name of a specific people but a generic description of roaming groups of marauders. But the existence of such groups may help to explain why a powerful empire like Egypt regarded the Israelites as a threat. Some centuries before, it had suffered an invasion from the east, by a group known as the Hyksos, who seized hold of the country for 160 years, and the memory remained. Egypt was on its guard against outsiders.
The fact that Abraham and his descendants were known to others as <i>Ivrim</i> suggests that they too were seen as Habiru, a potential danger to the more settled peoples of the region. Abraham himself, despite his long residence in Canaan, was forced to describe himself as “an alien and a temporary resident” when he came to buy land from the local Hittites as a burial place for his wife, Sarah (Gen. 23:4). Nor did the Egyptians take readily to outsiders. A text of the time complained that “strangers from outside have come into Egypt…. Foreigners have become people everywhere” (Admonitions of Ipuwer Papyrus). So it is altogether likely that, faced with a growing population of Semitic herdsmen from Canaan, the Egyptians would have sensed a potential threat.
We do not have independent confirmation of the events of the Exodus. But we have enough background information to understand the context in which a pharaoh would say, “Look, the Israelites have become much too numerous for us. We must act wisely against them, in case they grow great, and when we are called to war they may join with our enemies, fight against us, and rise up to leave the land” (Ex. 1:9–10). This makes eminent sense, given the conditions of the time. With them a great drama began that was to leave its mark ever afterward on the life of the group whose descendants are the Jews of today.
The contrast between the two peoples could not have been greater. Egypt at that time was an indomitable power. It held sway over the whole ancient Near East. Ramses II conducted successful campaigns against the Hittites and the Libyans and launched punitive raids against Edom and Moab. He used the technical prowess and prosperity of Egypt to undertake a series of monumental building projects that have few rivals in the ancient world. He had colossal statues of himself erected throughout the country. The prefix Ra in his name tells us that he was seen as the sun god, a divine being whose rule was written in the heavens and whose word carried absolute command.
The Israelites, for their part, were a landless people, entirely at the mercy of the Egyptians. They had no power and, at first, no effective leadership. They were easily conscripted into forced labor. The Torah tells us that they were employed to build two of Ramses II’s great projects, the cities of Pithom (Per-Atum) and Ramses (probably Per-Ramesses-Meri-Imen). No group seemed less likely to become the people of eternity.
Had anyone suggested at the time that it would not be the Egypt of the pharaohs that would survive and change the moral landscape of the world, but instead a group of Hebrew slaves, it would have seemed an ultimate absurdity. The Egyptians believed that the Israelites were already on the verge of extinction. The earliest known reference to Israel outside the Bible is an inscription produced by Ramses’ successor, Merneptah, in the thirteenth century bce. The Merneptah Stele, a giant slab of black granite that stands today in the Cairo Museum, contains these words: “Israel is laid waste. His seed is no more.”
The clash between Moses and Ramses was no ordinary encounter. It deserves to be seen, in retrospect, as one of the defining confrontations of history. Between the most powerful empire of the ancient world and a powerless group of slave laborers, an immense question was being framed. What endures and what wanes? What survives and what is eclipsed? Ancient Egypt and ancient Israel were two nations that posed the great question of time: how, in a world of flux and change, do we create something that defeats mortality? The Egyptians gave one answer, a response that has long appealed to emperors and kings. We defeat time by building monuments that will outlive the winds and sands of time. Ancient Israel gave a different and altogether counterintuitive reply. We can identify exactly the moment when it occurred. It is set out in the twelfth and thirteenth chapters of the Book of Exodus.
The Israelites were about to go free. Nine of the ten plagues had already taken place. The tenth, they knew, would be the last. According to the biblical account, Moses gathered the people and instructed them on the preparations they were to make. By any standard it was an epic moment. For 210 years the Israelites had been in exile. They had experienced suffering, slavery, and attempted genocide. Now they were about to begin the journey known to history as the Exodus. What would Moses say? He might have spoken about freedom, or the promised destination, the “land flowing with milk and honey.” He might have chosen to speak about the arduous journey that lay ahead, what Nelson Mandela called “the long road to freedom.” Any of these would have been the great speech of a great leader.
Moses did none of these things. Instead he spoke about children, and the distant future, and the duty to pass on memory to generations yet unborn. Three times he turned to the theme:
<span class="poetry indentAll">And if your children should ask you, “What is this rite you perform?” you shall say…. (Ex. 12:26–27)</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">And you shall tell your child on that day, “It is because of what the Lord did for me when I went out of Egypt.” (ibid. 13:8)</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">And if in that time your child should ask you, “What is this?” you shall say to him…. (ibid. 13:14)</span>
About to gain their freedom, the Israelites were told that they were to become a <i>nation of educators</i>. That is what made Moses not just a great leader but a unique one. Freedom – he was suggesting – is won not on the battlefield nor in the political arena but in the human imagination and will. As the American justice, Judge Learned Hand, put it: “Liberty lies in the hearts of men and women; when it dies there, no constitution, no law, no court can save it; no constitution, no law, no court can even do much to help it.” <i>To defend a land you need an army, but to defend freedom you need education</i>. You need parents, families, and homes and a constant conversation between the generations. Above all you need memory – the kind of memory that never forgets the bread of affliction and the bitter herbs of slavery.
Freedom is more than revolution. The pages of history are littered with peoples who won their freedom only to lose it again. The “constitution of liberty” is one of the most vulnerable of all human achievements. Individual freedom is simple. Collective freedom – a society that honors the equal dignity of all – depends on constant vigilance, a sustained effort of education. If we forget where we came from, the battles our ancestors fought and the long journey they had to take, then in the end we lose it again.
So Moses led his people along the least likely path to eternity. The Israelites became builders, but what they constructed was not monuments of stone. Instead it was a way of life inspired by the twin ideals of justice and compassion. Its bricks were holy deeds; its mortar, study and the life of the mind. What Moses taught, and what the Jewish people came to discover, is that you achieve immortality not by building pyramids or statues – but by <i>engraving your values on the hearts of your children, and they on theirs, so that our ancestors live on in us, and we in our children, and so on until the end of time</i>.
It was an astonishing insight, so unlike anything else in the ancient world that, contemplating it, it is hard not to feel oneself in the presence of transcendence, a totally unpredictable moment when one of the great truths of the human situation emerged for the first time. The people who survived and eventually became a nation of visionaries and prophets, scholars and sages, had little in their immediate past to suggest future greatness, except one thing: a voice heard intermittently since the days of the patriarchs, summoning them to a way of life quite different from their neighbors’. It said that God is not the power that enslaves but the power that sets free. Instead of worshipping mighty rulers, it taught that God is to be served by protecting the dignity of the widow, the orphan, the stranger, the weak, the vulnerable, and the neglected. Holiness is found not in monumental architecture but in words and teachings, above all in the instruction that takes place at home. “Read not <i>banayikh,</i> ‘your children,’ but <i>bonayikh</i>, ‘your builders,’” said the sages (<i>Berakhot</i> 64a), and it was an insight Jews did not forget. No civilization, no faith has been as child-centered as Judaism. As a result, none has stayed so perennially young, so self-renewing through time. On Pesaḥ, telling our story to our children, we relive the secret of Jewish renewal.
The men and women who built Ramses’ temples lived through one of the great revelations of history. Because of it the Jewish people became a nation, a nation dedicated to bringing new generations into being and handing on to them the heritage of the past. The result was that Jewish identity, and with it the Jewish dream, never died. By telling the Israelites in Egypt to become a nation of educators, Moses turned a group of slaves into a people of eternity.

Pesah, Freud, and Jewish Identity

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>They said to him, "Tell us...what is your trade and where are you coming from? Which country is yours and which is your people?” And he said to them, “I am a Hebrew, and it is the Lord God of heaven that I fear, who made both the sea and the land.”</i> (Jonah 1:8–9)</small></span>
Moses’ first question to God was Mi anokhi, “Who am I?” (Ex. 3:11). That remains the question of Jews throughout the ages. No people has puzzled longer and harder about its own identity, and this was, perhaps, inevitable. For much of history, Jews have been a minority in lands not their own. Even as a sovereign nation, they were surrounded by great empires and indomitable powers. Almost always, what was most conspicuous about them was that they were different. They told a different story, heard a different music, lived a way of life that was singular and countercultural, quite unlike that of their neighbors.
The word <i>kadosh</i>, holy, in the Bible means, among other things, “distinctive,” “set apart.” Understanding the word <i>Ivri</i>, “Hebrew,” to mean “a side,” or more specifically, “the opposite side,” the sages interpreted the description of Abraham as <i>haIvri</i>, “the Hebrew,” to mean that “he was on one side while the rest of the world was on the other.” Identity has never been something Jews could take for granted. It involved, among other things, the courage to swim against the tide, to stand apart from the zeitgeist, the spirit of the times. Beneath the simple question of a child, “Why is this night different?” is another, deeper query: “Why is this people different?” or “Who am I?” We answer by telling a story – the story of our ancestors long ago, but also the story of which we are a part. Pesaḥ is the festival of Jewish identity. It is the night on which we tell our children who they are.
On a superficial reading of the Bible, Moses was asking, “Who am I to stand before Pharaoh?” He was asking not about identity, but about his personal worthiness for such a mission. Moses, the Torah intimates, was not a man convinced of his place in history. He did not seek leadership. On the contrary, he kept refusing it. “They will not believe me…. I am slow of speech and tongue…. Please send someone else” (Ex. 4:10). He was, a later passage says, “a very humble man, more so than anyone else on the face of the earth” (Num. 12:3). He accepted the divine call not because he held a high opinion of himself, but because the task was real, the need great, the hour pressing, and the command inescapable. He had, in Shakespeare’s phrase, “greatness thrust upon him.”
There is, though, a deeper level at which Moses was indeed asking a question of identity. He faced a problem that has become acute wherever – in the Diaspora, even in the State of Israel itself – Jews have become part of a wider culture. A biographer, describing Moses when he first heard the call of God, would have had difficulty knowing who he was and where his loyalties lay. This was a man rescued as a child by an Egyptian princess, adopted by her, raised in Pharaoh’s palace, and brought up as an Egyptian prince. When he escaped to Midian and rescued Yitro’s daughters at the well, they went back and told their father, “An Egyptian rescued us” (Ex. 2:19). In appearance, manner, dress, and speech, Moses resembled an Egyptian, not an Israelite.
Moses’ question, “Who am I?” was therefore real and acute – an existential crisis. Who was he and where did his destiny lie? Was he an Egyptian or an Israelite, a prince or a slave, a member of the ruling family of the greatest empire of the time, or part of a people groaning under oppression? The mind reels at such a choice. Before him lay two alternative futures: on the one hand, a life of quietude in Midian with his father-in-law’s family, tending the flock in remote pastures, far from the noise of politics and power. On the other lay a life of struggle and an almost impossible challenge: to lead a people from slavery and teach them to be free – servants of no man, but of God alone.
What Moses discovered, alone with his flocks on the mountain, was that there are some choices from which we cannot hide. Almost the first words God says to him are, “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob” (Ex. 3:6). God is not, at this point, telling Moses who God is. That comes later, in the famous and enigmatic words <i>Ehyeh asher Ehyeh</i>, “I am who I am” (ibid. 3:14). Instead God is telling Moses who he – Moses – is: the child of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, three people who left the securities of land, birthplace, and father’s house to begin a journey to an unknown destination, their only security the voice of God. Moses – God is saying – is not a prince of Egypt but the child of his ancestors and therefore the brother of those who, at that moment, were tasting the bitterness of slavery. Their plight was his responsibility. Their fate was his.
In his innermost heart, Moses knew this. There is a fascinating verse near the beginning of his story: “One day, after Moses grew up, he went out to where his people were and he saw their hard labor” (Ex. 2:11). Even then, Moses knew he was one of them. Seeing a Hebrew being beaten by an Egyptian taskmaster, he intervened. To be a Jew is to know that one cannot be indifferent when one’s people are suffering. “Israel,” said Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai, “is like a single body with one soul. When one is injured, all feel the pain.”
A similar self-discovery affected several individuals who became, in the nineteenth century, protagonists of Zionism, among them Moses Hess and Theodor Herzl. Highly assimilated Jews, they nonetheless identified with the plight of their people as they witnessed anti-Semitism – during the Damascus Blood Libel (1840) in the case of Hess, the Dreyfus trial in France (1894–95) in the case of Herzl. In a moment of truth they knew that to be a Jew is to be part of a covenant of fate through which, in the rabbinic phrase, “All Israel are responsible for one another” (<i>Shevuot</i> 39a).
Jewish identity is a phenomenon of birth because ultimately we carry within us not only the genes but also the hopes, tears, commitments, and dreams of our ancestors. Our God is the God of Abraham and Sarah and of the hundreds of generations of their descendants whose children we are. That is what a child discovers on Pesaḥ, even though it may be many years before he or she can articulate it in these terms: we are part of a story that began long before our birth and will continue after we are no longer here. More than identity is something we choose, it is something that chooses us. To be a Jew is to hear a voice from the past, summoning us to an often tempestuous and never less than demanding future, and knowing inescapably that this is the narrative of which I am a part. That is what Moses discovered alone on the mountain, watching a bush that seemed to catch fire and burn without being consumed.
At the end of his life, Sigmund Freud wrote a strange work called <i>Moses and Monotheism</i>. Few works have been more closely studied as a key to Freud’s identity. This may have been his intention, because it was the last book he wrote, and by the time it was published, in 1939, Freud was living as a refugee in London. In Vienna, where he had previously lived and worked, Jews were being attacked in the streets. Austrians had welcomed their annexation into Hitler’s Germany in March 1938, and almost immediately the Jews of Vienna, who made up one-sixth of the city’s population, were stripped of all civic rights: to own property, to be employed, to exercise a profession, and to enter restaurants or public parks. SS sentries took leading Jews, among them Vienna’s chief rabbi, Dr. Israel Taglicht, then a man of seventy-five, and forced them to wash the city’s pavements in full view of passersby, who watched with amusement and derision. Within a month, knowing that worse was to come, more than five hundred Austrian Jews had committed suicide. This was no passing madness. In 1897, Vienna had elected as its mayor the publicly anti-Jewish Karl Lueger, and it was there, between 1908 and 1913, that the young Adolf Hitler received his first and most influential lessons in anti-Semitism.
<i>Moses and Monotheism</i>, Freud’s last testament, is an extraordinary work. In it he tries to prove that Moses was an Egyptian who turned his attention to the Israelites after the failure of Amenhotep IV, later known as Ikhnaton, to introduce an early and primitive form of monotheism (actually, sun worship) into Egypt. Many books have been written in an effort to understand what Freud was trying to achieve by this generally discredited speculation, and what he was communicating, consciously or otherwise, about his own identity as a Jew. That is not my concern here. Early on in the book, however, there is a curious detail whose significance has not been adequately commented on or understood. I call it Freud’s greatest and most fascinating Freudian slip.
The context in which it occurs is a digression wherein Freud notes that many legends of heroes in antiquity share a common narrative structure. The hero’s birth is fraught with danger. As a child, he is exposed to the elements in a way that would normally lead to his death. Instead, however, he is rescued and brought up by adoptive parents. Only much later does he discover his true identity. This, or something like it, is the tale told of the Babylonian hero Sargon and, among others, Cyrus, Oedipus, Romulus, Karna, Paris, Perseus, Heracles, and Gilgamesh. It is also the story of Moses.
At this point, however, Freud notes that in one respect the Moses narrative is diametrically different from the others. In all the other stories the hero is a person of noble birth who is brought up by a family in humble circumstances and only later discovers that royal blood flows in his veins. In the case of Moses, the opposite is true. He is brought up as a prince. His true identity is that he belongs to a nation of slaves.
Freud draws attention to this fact, but – assuming, as I cannot, that the biblical story is a human construct, a myth – immediately concludes that the Moses narrative is a fabrication designed to mask its original form. In this earlier version, Moses actually <i>is</i> an Egyptian prince, whose life was in danger because Pharaoh had been told in a prophetic dream that a child born within his own household would one day threaten his throne and kingdom. According to this version, it was Pharaoh who ordered the baby to be thrown into the Nile, and a Jewish couple – Amram and Yokheved – who rescued him and brought him up as their own. Freud is aware of the fact that the existence of such a story is utterly implausible. Who, after all, would have told it? Not the Egyptians, because it glorified a man who became their enemy. Not the Israelites, because it turned their own deliverer into a member of the very people that had afflicted them. That, says Freud, is why the tale was changed – leaving unexplained, indeed inexplicable, his own hypothesis, that it originally had a different form.
What Freud failed to see – though the evidence was in front of him – was that the story of Moses is not a myth but an anti-myth, a protest against the social and spiritual assumptions of the mythic age. In myth, people are born to greatness. The universe is hierarchical. Some are born to rule, others – the vast majority – to be ruled. That view, common to all pagan cultures and held by Plato and Aristotle, was what Judaism denied. Heroism is not a fact of birth. It is a matter of moral courage. It is not found only, or even primarily, among kings or princes. Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob, Rachel and Leah – these are simple people living ordinary lives, transfigured only by a vision, a call.
Saul, Israel’s first king, looks the part. He is tall, “head and shoulders” above his contemporaries. Yet he proves to lack the moral strength needed by a leader. David, Israel’s greatest ruler, is the youngest of eight brothers, so insignificant that when Samuel, on God’s instruction, visits the family, they forget about him until the prophet, having rejected the other siblings, asks if there is anyone else. True royalty, the Bible intimates, does not lie in physical strength, outward appearance, or noble ancestry. Not accidentally does the life of Moses contradict the stories told of other heroes in antiquity. He is not a prince in disguise. His greatness lies in the fact that he is the child of slaves whose lives were touched and transformed by the word of God.
Freud had mixed feelings about his own identity. He admired Jews and never denied his Jewishness, but he was tone-deaf to the music of Judaism and of religion generally. Who knows whether, seeing the unleashing of those dark instinctual forces he believed to exist just below the surface of civilization as Nazism gripped Vienna, Freud tried to shift the blame for monotheism from Jews to a long-dead Egyptian, as if to say, “We are not to blame for the repression of those instincts that are now returning with murderous fury.” Whatever his reason, there is no doubt that Freud missed one of the most powerful truths of the Bible, conveyed specifically in the detail of the Moses story that he noted and then misinterpreted. Those whom the world despises, God loves. A child of slaves can be nobler than a prince. God’s standards are not power or privilege. As God tells Samuel just before he first sets eyes on David: “The Lord does not see as a man sees; men judge by appearances, but the Lord judges by the heart” (I Sam. 16:7). To have faith, as Judaism understands it, is to recognize God’s image in the weak, the powerless, the afflicted, the suffering, and then to fight for their cause. Had he understood this, Freud might have sent a quite different message of courage to his people as they faced their darkest night. We, at least, can see what Freud did not: that in deciding that his destiny lay not in an Egyptian palace, but with his people, Moses helped write one of the greatest narratives of hope in the literature of mankind.

Building a Society of Freedom

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>Rabbi Yoḥanan said: Wherever you find the greatness of the Holy One, blessed be He, there you find His humility…. [Thus] it is written in the Torah: “For the Lord your God is God of gods and Lord of lords, the great, mighty and awe-inspiring God, who shows no favoritism and accepts no bribe” [Deut. 10:17]. And immediately afterwards it is written, “He upholds the cause of the orphan and widow, and loves the stranger, giving him food and clothing” [ibid. 10:18].</i> (Liturgy for the conclusion of the Sabbath)</small></span>
We do not know why it was in Israel, an otherwise small and undistinguished people, that a divine call was heard that was to change not only them but eventually the moral horizons of mankind. Little has survived from the archaeological records of those times that might shed light on this sequence of events. Little <i>could</i> survive, since by definition we speak not of great military victories recorded in triumphal inscriptions on monumental buildings, but of a revolution in consciousness. Nor should we believe that the religion of ancient Israel had, as it were, no historical context. There were systems of law before that of Moses, the Hammurabi’s Code being only the most famous of the several that have survived from ancient times. Mesopotamian, Egyptian, and Hittite documents attribute acts of justice and kindness to kings. The covenant – the single most important concept of the Hebrew Bible and of Jewish thought generally – is an ancient institution, part of the diplomatic vocabulary of the Near East in patriarchal times, specifically as a form of peace treaty between nations. Even monotheism itself, as we noted in the previous chapter, though it began in Israel, was at least prefigured in the failed religious reforms of Amenhotep IV, who sought to reduce the number of gods in the Egyptian pantheon. We do no justice to the originality of Israel’s faith if we seek to remove it from history altogether, for it was precisely in and through history that Israel sensed the providence of God.
Yet there can be no doubt that the religion of ancient Israel was one of the most stunning transformations ever wrought in humanity’s moral imagination, never more so than in the fact of the Exodus itself. In antiquity the gods were on the side of the established power. They underwrote the reign of kings, emperors, and princes – an idea revived in Europe in the Middle Ages in the form of the doctrine of the “divine right of kings.” Rulers ruled because they were gods, or children of gods, or prime intermediaries between the gods and mankind. They held sway on earth for the same reason as did the sun in the sky: there was an order on earth as in heaven, by which the strong ruled the weak, and power was the guarantor of order. That God, creator of heaven and earth, might intervene in history <i>to liberate slaves</i> was the ultimately unthinkable. Thus a paradox was born, which ever since has inspired men and women to break the chains of their oppression: that true power is distinguished by its concern for the powerless, that greatness is measured by the ability to hear the cry of the otherwise unheard – the weak, the vulnerable, “the widow, the orphan, and the stranger” – and that freedom is not worthy of its name unless it means freedom for all.
Again we owe to the historian Paul Johnson one of the finest descriptions of what Judaism contributed to the history of moral thought:
<span class="poetry indentAll">All the great conceptual discoveries of the intellect seem obvious and inescapable once they have been revealed, but it requires a special genius to formulate them for the first time. The Jews had this gift. To them we owe the idea of equality before the law, both divine and human; of the sanctity of life and the dignity of the human person; of the individual conscience and so of personal redemption; of the collective conscience and so of social responsibility; of peace as an abstract ideal and love as the foundation of justice, and many other items which constitute the basic moral furniture of the human mind. Without the Jews it might have been a much emptier place. (<i>A History of the Jews</i>)</span>
We cannot be certain what it was about the first Hebrews that allowed them to hear a voice from heaven summoning them to a quite new conception of religious life. It cannot, however, be accidental that Jewish history begins with two momentous journeys, Abraham and Sarah’s from Mesopotamia and Moses and the Israelites’ from pharaonic Egypt. Mesopotamia and Egypt were the two greatest powers of their day, the first centers of civilization – whose technical prowess is still, in retrospect, awesome in its achievements. Yet what we sense between the lines of the Bible is that, despite their proficiency, they were ethically deficient. They were highly stratified societies in which great wealth and power were concentrated in relatively few hands, and in which the many lived lives of quiet desperation.
It is surely no coincidence that the patriarchs – and Moses himself at the time of his call – were shepherds who spent long stretches of time alone, tending their flocks in the silence of hills and fields. It was to them that God was revealed not as something seen but as a presence heard – a voice, a call. This was a God radically unlike the deities of myth, who were for the most part personified forces of nature: the sun, the sea, the rain, the storm. The God of Abraham and Moses created and thus <i>transcended</i> nature. He was therefore, in the purest sense, <i>free</i>, and summoned mankind to a similar freedom. No longer bound, as were the gods of myth, to a particular place, culture, and social order, He taught those who heard His voice to realize, for the first time, that existing social structures were not written into the fabric of the universe. They were human creations, and could, under divine guidance, be replaced by a more just and equitable dispensation. Above all, the realization that God was singular and alone gave unprecedented dignity to the human person, singular and alone. For the first time it became possible to conceive that <i>every</i> human life has sanctity; that we all carry within us a fragment of the divine.
The religious passion of the ancient world was, above all, for order in the midst of an ever-threatening chaos, whether in the form of floods and droughts, foreign invasions, or damaging internal conflicts of power. The mindset of myth is profoundly conservative, seeking to canonize the status quo. An ancient Egyptian text attributed to Nefer-rohu expresses the horror felt at social disturbances that brought about change: “I show thee a land in lamentation and distress. The man with a weak arm [now] has [a strong] arm…. I show thee how the undermost is turned to uppermost.” Compare this with the exhilaration of Hannah’s song of thanksgiving when she gives birth to a long-awaited son: “The Lord makes destitute, enriches, / debases; He raises – / He lifts the poor out of the dusts, / and raises abject men from the dunghills, / to seat them up there with princes, / to bequeath them chairs of honor” (I Sam. 2:7–8). For the first time, God is associated with change, transformation, revolution. Nothing is fixed in the human landscape except the rules of ethics themselves – God’s eternal word, calling for justice, equity, and compassion, and constantly challenging, through a succession of prophets, the corruptions of power and the exploitation of the weak.
The Exodus became a watershed in Israel’s history. The Mosaic books constantly refer to it. The revelation and covenant at Mount Sinai begin with it: “I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, out of the grip of slavery” (Ex. 20:2). It formed the framing logic of Israel’s laws. Not only did it serve to explain why the people were bound in loyalty to the God who had rescued them and given them freedom. No less important, it was a standing reminder of what a society can become when people forget God and instead worship human constructs, such as power itself. Through reflection on the experience of their ancestors in Egypt, the Israelites would remember what it feels like to be on the receiving end of persecution, and thus develop a sense of solidarity with the poor. Their task in the Promised Land was to build a counter-Egypt, an antithesis of empire, an alternative society established on the principles of <i>tzedaka</i> and <i>mishpat</i>, distributive and retributive justice, and the covenantal virtues of <i>ḥesed</i> and <i>raḥamim</i>, kindness and compassion. The God of freedom asks nothing less of His covenantal people than that they shape a social order of universal freedom, in which the basic requirements of human dignity are available to all.
The architectonics of biblical liberty are immensely detailed, but they can be summarized along three dimensions. The first is a humane concern for the poor – an insistence that they never suffer hunger, or be humiliated by their economic circumstances:
<span class="poetry indentAll">When you make a loan of any kind to your neighbor, do not go into his house to get what he is offering as a pledge. Stay outside and let the man to whom you are making the loan bring the pledge out to you. If the man is poor, do not go to sleep with his pledge in your possession. Return his cloak to him by sunset, so that he may sleep in it…. Do not take advantage of a hired man who is poor and needy, whether he is a brother Israelite or an alien living in one of your towns. Pay him his wages each day before sunset, because he is poor and is counting on it…. Do not deprive the alien or the fatherless of justice, or take the cloak of a widow as a pledge. Remember that you were slaves in Egypt and the Lord your God redeemed you from there. That is why I command you to do this thing.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">When you are harvesting in your field and you overlook a sheaf, do not go back and get it. Leave it for the alien, the fatherless, and the widow, so that the Lord your God may bless you in all the work of your hands. When you beat the olives from your trees, do not go over the branches a second time. Leave what remains for the alien, the fatherless, and the widow. When you harvest the grapes in your vineyard, do not go over the vines again. Leave what remains for the alien, the fatherless, and the widow. Remember that you were slaves in Egypt. That is why I command you to do this. (Deut. 24:10–22)</span>
There is something extraordinarily humane about these ordinances, and although they speak to an agrarian order more than three thousand years ago, the principle they adumbrate remains true and compelling today. Freedom, as Nobel Prize-winning economist Amartya Sen reminds us, involves more than an absence of constraints. “The bonded laborer born into semi-slavery, the subjugated girl child stifled by a repressive society, the helpless, landless laborer without substantial means of earning an income are all deprived not only in terms of well-being, but also in terms of the ability to lead responsible lives, which are contingent on having certain basic freedoms” (<i>Development as Freedom</i>). A society in which the few have wealth and many are on the verge of starvation is not free by the standards of the Hebrew Bible.
The second dimension, equally radical, and essentially tied to Israel’s experience of exile, is concern for the rights and welfare of <i>the stranger</i>. The Mosaic books never tire of this theme – the rabbis pointed out that whereas the Torah in one place commands love of the neighbor, in no fewer than thirty-six places it urges love of the stranger. “Do not oppress a stranger, because <i>you yourselves know how it feels to be a stranger</i>: you were strangers in Egypt” (Ex. 23:9). For the ancient world generally, even for such as Plato and Aristotle, strangers were aliens, beyond the radius of concern, unentitled to civil rights or citizenship. Few things would have been less intelligible to them than the principle that “The community is to have the same rules for you and for the stranger living among you…you and the stranger shall be the same before the Lord” (Num. 15:16). This is the second revolution of the Exodus, and part of Israel’s moral struggle against tribalism and its modern successor, xenophobic nationalism. Strangers, too, have rights and make a legitimate claim on our humanity, for we are all strangers to someone else. This is something Israel is expected not merely to know abstractly but to feel in the deepest recesses of its collective memory. “You yourselves were strangers in Egypt.”
The third and most compelling impact of Egypt was the enactment of freedom in time: the threefold sabbatical structure of the seventh day, the seventh year, and the Jubilee, the year that marked the completion of seven septennial cycles. Despite attempts of historians to trace a connection to the Babylonian calendar, the Sabbath was an unprecedented innovation. It meant that one day in seven all hierarchies of wealth and power were suspended. No one could be forced to work: not employees, or slaves, or even domestic animals. In the seventh year, debts were remitted and slaves sent free. In the Jubilee – when the shofar was sounded, proclaiming “liberty throughout the land to all its inhabitants” (Lev. 25:10) – all ancestral land was returned to its original owners. The logic of these laws is simple: “For the Israelites belong to Me as servants; they are My servants whom I brought out of Egypt” (ibid. 25:55). Those who are servants to God may not be slaves to man.
Biblical law did not end slavery. That did not happen in the West until the nineteenth century, and in the case of the United States, not without a civil war. It did, however, end it as a given of birth, an ontological fact. Under biblical law it became a temporary condition, something suspended every seventh day and ended after seven years. Shabbat, the sabbatical year, and the Jubilee became Judaism’s most original contribution to political life. In the history of the human mind there have been many utopias, imagined paradises. None has been realized. Indeed the word “utopia” itself means “no place.” Utopias never happen because they come without a realistic map of how to get from here to there. They are discontinuous with the present. They can be brought about only by revolution, and almost without exception, revolutions replace iniquities and inequities with injustices of their own. What is unique to Judaism is the sabbatical concept of <i>utopia now</i>, a rehearsal, every seventh day and seventh year, of an ideal social order in which rest is part of the public domain, available equally to all. The Sabbath is the lived enactment of the messianic age, a world of peace in which striving and conflict are (temporarily) at an end and all creation sings a song of being to its Creator.
At the end of his long and detailed analysis of early Israel, Norman Gottwald comes – rightly, I believe – to the conclusion that its faith is “the distinctive self-consciousness of a society of equals.” Israel, he says, “<i>thought</i> it was different because it <i>was</i> different: it constituted an egalitarian social system in the midst of stratified societies.” To be sure, that equality was never total and always at risk. That is the constant refrain of the prophets – themselves testimony to Judaism’s underlying egalitarianism with their willingness to confront kings and “speak truth to power.” Yet Jewry did succeed, more than most, in sustaining the dignity of its members through suffering and poverty. One vignette is revealing – Melvin Urofsky’s description of Brandeis’ reaction to the East European Jewish immigrants to the United States when he first encountered them in his role as mediator of the New York garment workers’ strike of 1910:
<span class="poetry indentAll">While going through the lofts, he heard numerous quarrels between workers and their bosses, and was amazed that they treated one another more like equals than as inferiors and superiors. In one argument an employee shouted at the owner, “<i>Ihr darft sich shemen! Past dos far a Yid?</i>” (“You should be ashamed! Is this worthy of a Jew?”), while another time a machine operator lectured his employer with a quotation from Isaiah: “It is you who have devoured the vineyard, the spoil of the poor is in your houses. What do you mean by crushing My people, by grinding the face of the poor? says the Lord God of hosts” [3:14].</span>
For the Torah, and for post-biblical Judaism no less, society is a moral construct, a place where freedom is a collective reality to which all contribute and by which all have equal access, if not to wealth and power, then at least to human dignity in its most tangible forms: food to eat, clothes to wear, a source of independent livelihood, and a home: Micah’s famous vision of a world in which “Every man will sit under his own vine and his own fig tree, and no one will make them afraid” (4:4). This is not the only version of an egalitarian society, but it is the oldest, the most consistently achieved, and the most humane. It did not happen by chance. Its existence was predicated on collective <i>memory</i>. Once a year, every year, every Jew was commanded to relive the experience of Egypt as a constant reminder of the bread of oppression and the bitter herbs of slavery – to know that the battle for freedom is never finally won but must be fought in every generation.

History and Memory

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>Generation by generation, each person must see himself as if he himself had come out of Egypt, as it is said: “This is because of what the Lord did for me when I came out of Egypt.”</i> (Mishna <i>Pesaḥim</i> 10:5)</small></span>
All Jews who are at all conscious of their identity as Jews,” wrote the late Sir Isaiah Berlin, “are steeped in history.” He continued:
<span class="poetry indentAll">They have longer memories, they are aware of a longer continuity as a community than any other which has survived…. Whatever other factors may have entered into the unique amalgam which, if not always Jews themselves, at any rate the rest of the world instantly recognizes as the Jewish people, historical consciousness – sense of continuity with the past – is among the most powerful. (“Benjamin Disraeli, Karl Marx and the Search for Identity”)</span>
Once, at a dinner, I found myself sitting next to a famous opera singer. “What I envy you for [he meant Jews],” he said, “is your gift of history. I know nothing about my great-grandparents, but you have a history that goes all the way back.” So strong is this sense that Benjamin Disraeli (born a Jew, but baptized by his father as a child) referred to it in one of his most famous replies in Parliament. In 1835, the Irish Catholic politician Daniel O’Connell made a slighting reference to Disraeli’s Jewish ancestry. Disraeli replied, “Yes, I am a Jew, and when the ancestors of the right honorable gentleman were brutal savages in an unknown island, mine were priests in the temple of Solomon.”
Where does it come from, this Jewish consciousness of the past? The prophets of Israel were the first people to see God in <i>history</i>. The ancient world – the world of myth – saw the presence of the gods in <i>nature</i>, in the unchanging rhythm of the seasons and the fearful dislocations of flood, famine, and storm. The revolution of ancient Israel was to see God not in nature but above it, utterly transcendent, yet revealing Himself to mankind in the form of a call to build a different kind of society than any that had existed hitherto.
Monotheism was not the only great Israelite discovery. More significant still was the realization that God is not only the Creator but also the Redeemer. As Judah Halevi pointed out in the <i>Kuzari</i>, the Ten Commandments begin not with the words “I am the Lord your God who created heaven and earth,” but with “I am the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt” (Ex. 20:2). He is to be found not only in what Wordsworth described as that “sense sublime” of “something far more deeply interfused, whose dwelling is the light of setting suns, and the round ocean and the living air,” but in the great events of history, above all the liberation of a small slave people from the grip of the greatest empire of the ancient world, the Egypt of the pharaohs.
From earliest times, Israel knew that something unprecedented had happened whose significance would reverberate far beyond its own time. Speaking to the generation that would soon cross the Jordan and enter the Promised Land, Moses reminded them of the unique experience they had undergone:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Ask now about the former days, long before your time, from the day God created man on earth; ask from one end of the heavens to the other. Has anything so great as this ever happened, or has anything like it ever been heard of?…Has any god ever tried to take for himself one nation out of another nation, by testings, by miraculous signs and wonders and wars, by a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, or by great and awesome deeds, like all the things the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your very eyes? (Deut. 4:32, 34)</span>
Israel knew God not by contemplating the sun and the stars but directly through its own past. Where other faiths, ancient and modern, saw religion as the flight from history into a world without time, Judaism saw time itself as the arena where God and mankind met. Three-quarters of the Hebrew Bible is made up of historical narratives. Jews were the first to make the momentous claim that history has meaning. It is not merely a sequence of disconnected events, but the long story of humanity’s response to, or rebellion against, the voice of God as it echoes in the conscience of mankind.
It is all the more remarkable, therefore, that biblical Hebrew has no word for history. Modern Hebrew had to borrow a word: <i>historia</i>. The key word of the Hebrew Bible is not <i>history</i> but <i>memory</i>. <i>Zakhor</i>, the command to remember, occurs time and again in the Torah:
<span class="poetry indentAll"><i>Remember</i> the earliest of days. (Deut. 32:7)</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll"><i>Remember</i> what Amalek did to you. (ibid. 25:17)</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">O My people, <i>remember</i> now what Balak king of Moab plotted against you. (Mic. 6:5)</span>
And with equal insistence, there is the command not to forget:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Beware lest you <i>forget</i> the Lord your God…lest you lift up your hearts and <i>forget</i> the Lord your God who brought you out of the land of Egypt…. And it shall come to pass if you indeed <i>forget</i> the Lord your God…I bear witness against you this day that you shall utterly perish. (Deut. 8:11–19)</span>
The word <i>zakhor</i> in one or other of its forms occurs no fewer than 169 times in the Hebrew Bible. As Yosef Ḥayim Yerushalmi notes, “Only in Israel and nowhere else is the injunction to remember felt as a religious imperative to an entire people” (<i>Zakhor: Jewish History and Jewish Memory</i>). This was Moses’ injunction to future generations: “Only be careful, and watch yourselves closely lest you forget the things your eyes have seen or let them slip from your heart as long as you live; teach them to your children and to their children” (Deut. 4:9). Jews were to become a people of memory.
The word <i>zakhar</i>, meaning “male,” comes from the same root as <i>zakhor</i>, “remember,” suggesting that there are two dimensions of Jewish identity – biological, conferred by the mother, and cultural, conferred by the father in his role as storyteller, guardian of a people’s past, which he is charged with handing on to his children. There is an identity we acquire at birth. We are the children of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; of Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and Leah. We are part of the covenantal family. That is the maternal gift. But there is another identity, going back not to the patriarchs and matriarchs but to the revelation at Mount Sinai, whose content we only gradually learn and internalize. That is the function traditionally ascribed to fathers, who are charged with giving children the identity that comes through memory.
The Hebrew verb <i>zakhor</i> signifies more than a consciousness of the past. My predecessor, Lord Jakobovits, pointed out that the word <i>yizkor</i>, the name given to the traditional Jewish prayer for the dead, is associated in the Torah with the future. “God remembered Noah” and brought him out on dry land. “God remembered Abraham” and rescued his nephew Lot from the destruction of the cities of the plain. “God remembered Rachel” and gave her a child. We remember for the sake of the future, and for life.
There is a profound difference between history and memory. History is <i>his</i> story – an event that happened sometime else to someone else. Memory is <i>my</i> story – something that happened to me and is part of who I am. History is information. Memory, by contrast, is part of identity. I can study the history of other peoples, cultures, and civilizations. They deepen my knowledge and broaden my horizons. But they do not make a claim on me. They are the past as past. Memory is the past as present, as it lives on in me. Without memory there can be no identity. Alzheimer’s disease, the progressive atrophying of memory function, is also the disintegration of personality. As with individuals, so with a nation: it has a continuing identity to the extent that it can remember where it came from and who its ancestors were.
Yet there is a paradox in the idea of collective memory. How can I <i>remember</i> what did not happen to me – an event that took place long before I was born? The answer given by the seder service on Pesaḥ is: through reenactment, by living again the events of ancient times as if they were happening now. That is the significance of the statement of the sages that on Pesaḥ, “Generation by generation, each person must see himself as if he himself had come out of Egypt.” At the beginning of the seder, by lifting the matza and declaring, “This is the bread of oppression our fathers ate in the land of Egypt,” we make the leap across time and turn “then” into “now.” “It is because of what the Lord did for <i>me</i> when <i>I</i> went out of Egypt” (Ex. 13:8). In these words tradition heard the continuous present, the past that lives on, the event that speaks to me in the first person singular.
There is something quite distinctive about the biblical approach to time. The historical books of the Bible are the first of their kind by several centuries, long before the Greek writer Herodotus (fifth century bce), known as “the father of history.” Yet the biblical narrative is never mere history, a recording of what happened because it happened, whether to entertain or to instruct. Nor is it myth, a prescientific attempt to explain why the world is as it is. It is nothing less than the sustained attempt to see events through the prism of faith, as the ongoing interaction between heaven and earth, command and response, the divine word and the human success or failure in hearing and acting on the word. It is saturated by the idea of covenant as the partnership initiated by God and entered into by mankind, making them partners in the work of redemption.
There is nothing preordained in this narrative. By giving humanity free will, God has made human beings His coauthors in writing the script of history. Yet it is not open-ended either, “a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.” History, as understood by the Torah, is the story of how human beings, led only by the sound of a voice, a call, began the long journey, not yet complete, to a Promised Land and a messianic age where people construct a society that honors the image of God in others, sanctifying life, building families of love and trust, shaping communities by the principles of justice and compassion, and living at peace with their neighbors. No religion has conferred on mankind a greater responsibility. We are not, in this narrative, condemned to fail because of hubris or “original sin.” We are not confined to pure submission to the will of God. Instead, God has entrusted His great creation to our safekeeping, and though the Hebrew Bible tells us that Israel failed often, it also tells us that God has never lost faith in us, though we may sometimes lose our faith in Him.
The concept of covenant is intimately related to time. “I have chosen him,” says the God of Abraham, “so that he may instruct his children and his household after him to keep to the way of the Lord, by doing what is right and just” (Gen. 18:19). The achievement of a free and just society is the work not of a moment but of many generations. Israel must experience exile before it can fully understand the concept of home. It must undergo slavery if it is to long with all its being for freedom. It must walk through the valley of the shadow of death to know in its bones the sanctity of life. That is why covenant is essentially linked to education and memory, for the journey is long – longer than many lifetimes – and only when each generation hands on to the next what it has heard and learned and prayed for does the journey continue; and only if the journey continues is history redeemed. History has meaning only for those who believe it has meaning. Without that, it is what Harold MacMillan called “events, dear boy, events.”
In his book <i>Zakhor: Jewish History and Jewish Memory</i>, Yosef Ḥayim Yerushalmi makes the fascinating observation that, having seen God in history and written an entire library of historical works, the Jewish people suddenly stopped writing history at the time of the destruction of the Second Temple. The last great Jewish historian was Josephus, who wrote his works in the first century of the Common Era. From then on, throughout the rabbinic literature of the mishnaic, talmudic, and medieval periods, there is virtually no historical writing, with the exception of the sixteenth century, when, in response to the Spanish expulsion, several works appeared, trying to make sense of the tragic fate of Jews in the Diaspora.
The great renaissance of historical writing occurred in the early nineteenth century, when the Society for the Science of Judaism was formed in Germany and the great works of Zunz, Graetz, and others began to appear. What Yerushalmi notes is that this new scholarly enterprise was born not in a sense of identification with the past, but precisely out of a sense of alienation. In the eyes of its founders, Judaism was a spent force, a relic of the past that had no future in post-Enlightenment Europe. All that remained, in Steinschneider’s words, was “to give it a decent burial.” It is said that Zunz, introduced in his old age to a Hebrew poet visiting from Russia, asked him, “Tell me, when did you live?” History is the dead past that only memory can revive.
It was Rabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch who delivered the most cogent critique of history as a substitute for memory:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Moses and Hesiod, David and Sappho, Deborah and Tyrtaeus, Isaiah and Homer, Delphi and Jerusalem, Pythian tripod and Cherubim – sanctuary, prophets and oracles, psalms and elegy – for us they all lie peacefully in one box, they all rest peacefully in one grave, they all have one and the same human origin, they all have one and the same significance, human, transitory and belonging to the past…. We let the old Jews fast on Tisha B’Av, we let them say <i>Seliḥot</i> and weep over <i>Kinot</i>. But in return we know far better than they do in which century these “poets” flourished, in what meter these “poets” composed…. Do these departed spirits rejoice in the literary gratitude of our present generation? Whom do they recognize as their true heirs? Those who repeated their prayers, but forgot their names, or those who forgot their prayers but remembered their names? (“Av I”)</span>
To be a Jew is to know that over and above history is the task of memory. As Jacob Neusner eloquently wrote: “Civilization hangs suspended, from generation to generation, by the gossamer strand of memory. If only one cohort of mothers and fathers fails to convey to its children what it has learned from its parents, then the great chain of learning and wisdom snaps. If the guardians of human knowledge stumble only one time, in their fall collapses the whole edifice of knowledge and understanding” (<i>Neusner on Judaism: Religion and Theology</i>). More than any other faith, Judaism made this a matter of religious obligation. Pesaḥ is where the past does not die but lives, in the chapter we write in our own lives and in the story we tell our children.

Not Only One

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>It was not only one man who rose up to destroy us: in every single generation people rise up to destroy us – but the Holy One saves us from their hands.</i> (Haggada)</small></span>
The first mention in the Torah of Jews as a people is a prelude to persecution. “A new king, who did not know of Joseph, came into power over Egypt. He said to his people, ‘Look, the people of the children of Israel (<i>Am Benei Yisrael</i>) have become too numerous for us. We must act wisely against them’” (Ex. 1:8–10). Wisdom in this case means forced labor, followed by enslavement, then the planned murder of every male child. It is the first but not the last attempted genocide in the pages of the Bible. The festival of Purim records a second failed attempt, this time by Haman, who persuades the Persian king to issue a decree “to destroy, slay, and exterminate all the Jews, young and old, women and children, on one day” (Est. 3:13).
Ironically, the first two references to Israel outside the Bible are obituaries for the Jewish people. The Merneptah Stele from Egypt in the thirteenth century bce, as we noted in an earlier chapter, states: “Israel is laid waste, her seed is no more.” The Mesha Stele, a basalt slab dating from the ninth century bce, stands today in the Louvre in Paris. In its inscription, Mesha, king of Moab, thanks his deity Chemosh for his victories in war. It includes the following lines: “As for Omri, king of Israel, he humbled Moab for many years, for Chemosh was angry with his land. And his son followed him and he also said, ‘I will humble Moab.’ In my time he spoke thus, but I have triumphed over him and over his house, while <i>Israel has perished forever</i>.” At times it is hard to know which is the greater wonder of history: Jewish survival, or the attempts of others to ensure Israel did not survive.
The historian Robert Wistrich calls anti-Semitism “the longest hatred,” and in a way it is, though it has taken too many forms for it to be described as a single phenomenon with one name. The Greek and Latin writers of classical antiquity were often hostile to Jews, accusing them of clannishness, strange customs, and superstitions. Horace condemns them for trying to make converts. Apion criticizes them for failing to worship the same gods as the Alexandrians. Seneca held that they rested on the seventh day because they were lazy. The worst of the pre-Christian polemicists was the Egyptian priest Manetho (third century bce), who described the Hebrews as a race of lepers who had been thrown out of Egypt. Many of these calumnies survived to be taken up and adapted in later centuries. That has been the fate of anti-Jewish myths: they may be dormant, but they never die. Yet it would be wrong to describe reactions to Jews in antiquity as universally hostile. Evidence suggests that Alexander the Great thought highly of them and rewarded them for their loyalty. Aristotle spoke well of them, as did his successor Theophrastus. Besides, the ancient world was not known for its love of foreigners, whoever they might be.
Something new enters the world with Christianity and with the early decision, following the Council of Jerusalem, that it would become not a religion directed to Jews, but one that sought adherents among the gentiles. A series of fateful judgments was incorporated into Christianity’s early texts and developed by the Church fathers: among them that Christianity was the “new Israel,” that God had rejected the “old Israel,” and that Jews had been guilty of willful blindness and worse in rejecting the Christian messiah. The proposal of Marcion – that Christianity should be separated completely from Judaism, with the New Testament as its only scripture – failed. From then on, Christianity was locked into an adversarial relationship with Judaism, glaringly apparent in the New Testament and the work of Christian thinkers from the second to the fourth centuries, among them Justin Martyr, Origen, Melito, Tertullian, Eusebius, Gregory of Nyssa, and St. John Chrysostom. This <i>Adversus Judaeos</i> tradition, often savage in its rhetoric, left a deep mark on the development of Christianity, a fact that became immensely consequential when – with the conversion of the Roman emperor Constantine in 313 – Christianity became a world power, which it was to remain for almost 1,500 years.
Hostility deepened into massacre with the First Crusade (1096), during which, on their way to the Holy Land, Christians massacred Jewish communities in northern France and Germany. It was at this time that the line “Pour out Your rage upon the nations that do not know You” (Ps. 79:6) began to appear in Haggadot, the one note of Jewish protest against the Christian slaughter of Jews in the name of God. From then on, the anti-Judaism of the Church began to take on a more irrational, demonic character. During the Middle Ages, Jews were accused of ritual murder, poisoning wells, desecrating the host, causing the Black Death, and colluding with the Devil. There were periodic forced conversions, public disputations, book burnings, show trials, burnings at the stake, mob attacks, and massacres. In the years following the Black Death alone (1347–50), some two hundred Jewish communities were destroyed. Jews were expelled from Brittany in 1239–40, Anjou and Maine in 1289, England in 1290, France at various periods from 1182 to 1394, and regions of Germany throughout the fifteenth century. In Spain, where they had experienced a rare golden age, an onslaught took place in 1391, during which synagogues and homes were burned, businesses looted, and many Jews murdered. From then on, Spanish Jews faced increasing hostility until their expulsion in 1492. Nor did the tragedy end there. Still to come were Luther’s tirade against Jews (“their synagogues should be set on fire their homes should likewise be broken down and destroyed…they should be deprived of their prayer books and Talmuds” [<i>Against the Jews and Their Lies</i>]), the invention of the ghetto (Rome 1555, by edict of Pope Paul IV), and the Chmielnicki pogroms (1648–58), during which as many as 100,000 Jews were slain. The experience of Jews in Christian Europe is one of the tragedies of mankind.
Nor was their experience under Islam an especially happy one. There seems to have been an expectation on the part of the first Muslims that Jews would willingly embrace the new faith, which, like Christianity, claimed to include and supersede earlier revelations. When this did not happen, reprisals were harsh. Islam began with a massacre of Jews in Medina, and like Christianity incorporated sharply anti-Jewish sentiments into its sacred texts. There were times, especially in its early period of expansion, when tolerance prevailed, though within limits. Jews were given <i>dhimmi</i> status as second-class citizens, which meant they had to pay special taxes and wear distinctive clothing (the yellow star Jews were forced to wear in Nazi Europe had its origins in medieval Baghdad). They were banned from government service and from building new houses of worship, and were subject to periodic public humiliations. At times, extreme Islamic sects made life intolerable. In 1066 the Jewish community of Granada was attacked and three thousand were killed. In 1090 the community was assaulted again by an Islamic sect known as the Almoravids, and during the next century it suffered an onslaught from a new group, the Almohads.
There is no doubt, however, that as a whole Jews fared better during the Middle Ages under Muslim rule than under Christian. What was remarkable, however, was how Christian myths that had no salience in Islamic terms were later adopted by Islam to fuel new and essentially alien forms of anti-Jewish hostility. Of these, the most striking is the blood libel. First instigated in Norwich in 1144 and then copied throughout Europe, this tactic accused Jews of killing Christian children to drink or use their blood for ritual purposes. Officially rejected by the Vatican, the myth persisted well into the twentieth century. From the perspective of Judaism, the myth is absurd: the consumption of blood is categorically forbidden. Within Christianity it makes sense: that is what the wine of Communion represents. (The playwright Arnold Wesker wrote a play, called <i>Blood Libel</i>, for the 850th anniversary of the event in Norwich, and was kind enough to send me a copy of the script. I read it and asked him why it had no Jewish characters – they were all offstage. He replied that the blood libel was a Christian phenomenon, in which Jews were objects, not participants.) Rooted in Christian theology, the blood libel nonetheless spread to Islam, where it appeared in Aleppo (1811, 1853), Beirut (1824), Antioch (1826), Hamma (1829), Tripoli (1834), Dayr al-Qamar (1847), Damanhur (1877), and Damascus (most famously in 1840, but also in 1848 and 1890). In 1983 the Syrian defense minister Mustafa Tlas wrote a book, <i>The Matzo of Zion</i>, to prove that the libel was true (“The Jew can kill you and take your blood in order to make his Zionist bread”), and in 1991 the Syrian delegate to the United Nations Human Rights Commission urged its members to read the book, the better to understand the nature of “Zionist racism.”
These are devastating chapters in the history of the human spirit. It was no wonder, therefore, that Jews vested immense – in some cases almost messianic – hopes in the Enlightenment, which promised the defeat of prejudice in the name of reason, and a new dawn of tolerance. It did not happen. Early on, there were ominous signs. In the 1750s, Voltaire, the great advocate of liberty, described Jews as “an ignorant and barbarous people, who have long united the most sordid avarice with the most detestable superstition” (<i>Philosophical Dictionary</i>), though he was gracious enough to add, “Still, we ought not to burn them.” In 1789, as the French National Assembly proclaimed its Declaration of the Rights of Man, anti-Jewish riots broke out in Alsace.
The great philosophers of modernity did not distinguish themselves by their generosity of imagination. Immanuel Kant spoke of Jews as “the vampires of society” and called for the “euthanasia” of Judaism. Fichte argued against giving civil rights to Jews. Hegel took Judaism as his model of a slave morality. Schopenhauer spoke of Jews as “no better than cattle.” Nietzsche blamed Judaism for the “falsification” of values. The great logician Gottlob Frege wrote in 1924 that he regarded it as a “misfortune that there are so many Jews in Germany.” Martin Heidegger, the greatest German philosopher of the twentieth century, was an enthusiastic member of the Nazi Party who never apologized for his admiration of Hitler or his betrayal of Jewish colleagues. I have seen no adequate account – though this may be my ignorance of the literature – of how it was that philosophy, which carried with it the highest hopes of an age of reason, utterly failed to confront anti-Semitism. Even Jean-Paul Sartre’s <i>Réflexions sur la Question Juive</i>, written in 1946 after the war, is a deeply flawed work, attributing no independent dignity to Jewish existence (his argument was that Jews do not create anti-Semitism; anti-Semitism creates Jews).
Reviewing this history, it is clear that anti-Semitism is not a unitary phenomenon, a coherent belief or ideology. Jews have been hated because they were rich and because they were poor; because they were capitalists and because they were communists; because they believed in tradition and because they were rootless cosmopolitans; because they kept to themselves and because they penetrated everywhere. Anti-Semitism is not a belief but a virus. The human body has an immensely sophisticated immune system that develops defenses against viruses. It is penetrated, however, because viruses mutate. Anti-Semitism mutates.
In pre-Christian times it took the relatively simple form of hostility to strangers, a <i>dis</i>like of the <i>un</i>like. In the early Christian centuries it became a religious phenomenon: anti-Judaism. In the Middle Ages it was transmuted into a series of myths whose common theme was that Jews were the cause of all bad things. Following the Enlightenment, religious or mythical justifications were no longer acceptable to secular public discourse, and thus racial anti-Semitism was born (the word “anti-Semitism” itself was coined only in 1879, by the German journalist Wilhelm Marr). The prestige given to prejudice by sacred texts was replaced by the new guarantor of truth: science. A pseudo-science of race was created, designed to prove that Jews were an inferior species. Other quasi-scientific disciplines were enlisted: an anthropology that identified “old” with “primitive”; a Darwinian reading of history that saw “natural selection” as the ruthless elimination of the weak by the strong; and a scientific approach to society (social engineering), including eugenics and other medical ideas, to construct the thought that society could be improved by the surgical removal of “flawed” individuals and groups. If philosophy failed Jews, so did science: there were all too few protests at these insanities. Inevitably, racial anti-Semitism was a more deadly form than any of its predecessors, because whereas religious convictions can be renounced, races can only be exterminated.
It is difficult to know what to say in the face of such evil, for evil it is, regardless of the sanctity or high ideals or pseudo-scientific concepts in which it has been clothed. Heaven alone knows whether Jews have been better or worse than other people, but no people who have ever lived have deserved such hate, such persecution. Nor has it ended.
An autobiographical note: I grew up in Christian Britain and went to Christian schools (in those days, Jewish day schools were rare). I experienced nothing but kindness from my teachers and friends. Those days left an enduring impression on me. They taught me admiration for a faith that was not and will never be my own. They showed me that deep and abiding tolerance is possible and has surpassing beauty. They helped me form friendships in later life with Christian leaders and others from other faiths – Muslim, Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Zoroastrian, and Bahai – which I cherish. As a child, when I came to the passage in the Haggada that speaks of hatred through the ages – “It was not only one man that rose up to destroy us” – I felt intuitively that those words referred to an age that had passed. They may have described the experience of my parents’ generation, but not mine. As I grew older, that conviction grew. The Holocaust, I believed, had taught humanity the words “Never again.”
I was wrong. Anti-Semitism in a new and virulent form – now focusing on collective Jewish existence in Israel while also attacking individual Jews and Jewish buildings in the Diaspora – has appeared again. With astonishing speed and ease, it has circumvented the immune systems built up by the West during the course of more than half a century of Holocaust education, interfaith dialogue, and anti-racist legislation. How did it happen?
Viruses are effective when they persuade the body’s immune system that they are part of the body itself. Viruses mutate so as to appear to host cells not as enemies but as friends. So great was the impact of the Holocaust that it rendered certain evils taboo: racism, “ethnic cleansing,” crimes against humanity, and attempted genocide. The only way anti-Semitism could penetrate such defenses was to turn them against Jews. Starting with the infamous 1975 United Nations resolution equating Zionism with racism, it reached a culmination in the United Nations Conference against Racism in Durban in September 2001, in which the State of Israel – the sole democracy in the Middle East – was uniquely accused of each of these evils in turn.
The attempt failed, but the language and narrative were established as acceptable forms of discourse in the public domain. A new myth, as powerful as any of its medieval precursors, was born in which the existence of a Jewish state, however small, became the cause of all international disorder, from the destruction of the World Trade Center less than a week after the Durban conference to the “clash of civilizations” that threatened the twenty-first century’s prospects of peace. Thus racial anti-Semitism mutated into mythological anti-Zionism with the further rider that all Jews are Zionists and thus legitimate targets of violence. Into this new mold, all the old fantasies of hate, from the blood libel to the late nineteenth century forgery <i>The Protocols of the Elders of Zion</i>, were poured and sprang again into life.
One date links medieval, modern, and postmodern hostility: Pesaḥ itself. Pesaḥ was the favored time for blood libels, for it was said and apparently believed, at least by the masses, that Jews needed blood to make matzot. It was the date chosen by the Nazis for the extermination of the Warsaw ghetto in 1943 (they deliberately chose Jewish holy days for their most brutal murders: this became known as the “Goebbels calendar”). It was the day selected by anti-Israel terrorists in 2002 for the suicide bombing in Netanya in which twenty-nine people were killed and hundreds injured as they prepared to celebrate the seder. There is something about the biblical festival of freedom that outrages those who believe – sometimes in the name of God, sometimes in the name of ethically advanced civilization – that freedom must, by definition, exclude Jews.
Why does anti-Semitism exist? There has been an almost endless set of speculations. Some have seen it in psychological terms: displaced fear, externalization of inner conflict, projected guilt, the creation of a scapegoat. Others have given it a sociopolitical explanation: Jews were a group that could conveniently be blamed for economic resentments, social unrest, class conflict, or destabilizing change. Yet others view it through the prism of culture and identity: Jews were the stereotyped outsiders against whom a group could define itself. There have been voices within Jewish tradition that declare hostility inevitable: “Esau hates Jacob,” or “From Sinai, hate (<i>sin’a</i>) descended into the world.” Yet others, noting the concentration of anti-Semitism among the very faiths – Christianity and Islam – that trace their descent to Abrahamic monotheism, favor a Freudian explanation in terms of the myth of Oedipus: we seek to kill those who gave us birth. It would be strange indeed if so complex a phenomenon did not give rise to multiple explanations.
My own view, though it does not essentially conflict with any of these hypotheses, is that Jews have been hated because they are different. To be sure, every people, race, and faith is different. None, however, has insisted with such tenacity on the right to be different, the duty to be different. Alone among the peoples of the Alexandrian and Roman empires, Jews rose up in rebellion – never on political grounds, but simply in defense of their right to practice their faith. Almost alone in Christian Europe, they refused to convert (some did; the majority did not) despite the immense pressures placed upon them, sometimes at the cost of life itself. In post-Enlightenment Europe they remained distinctive. They acculturated, integrated, but did not disappear. In the contemporary Middle East, the State of Israel remains an island of Jewish life in an Islamic sea. Jews are different. That, we recall, was Haman’s reason for advocating genocide: “There is a certain people, dispersed and scattered among the peoples…whose customs are different from those of all other people” (Est. 3:8). It is one thing to be different and an empire, a civilization, a world power; quite another to be different and a minority, whether in one’s own land or in dispersion. Jewish existence raises in its most acute form the problem of difference, and it always has.
There is something unusual, even unique, about the faith of Judaism. It was the world’s first monotheism. Abraham, Moses, and the prophets were the first to believe in a single God, creator of heaven and earth, whose authority transcended all earthly powers. Integral to Jewish faith is the proposition that God made (with Noah after the Flood) a covenant with all mankind. It is this covenant, with its insistence on the rule of justice and the sanctity of life, that is the earliest intimation of what today are known as codes of universal human rights (though the Torah itself speaks of commands and prohibitions rather than rights). Yet Judaism itself – the way of the Torah – is not, and was never seen as, a universal code. Instead, through a series of covenants with the patriarchs, and later the Israelites at Mount Sinai, it was the code of a particular people – one people, not all. From this arises the well-known but still remarkable fact that Judaism does not see itself as the only path to God. Malkitzedek, Yitro, and the daughter of Pharaoh who rescued Moses are just three of the figures who, outside the covenant of the Torah, nonetheless come to know and fear God. “The saintly among the nations of the world,” said the sages, “have a share in the World to Come” (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 105a). The seeming paradox can be stated simply: <i>the God of Israel is the God of all humanity, but the religion of Israel is not, and is not intended to be, the religion of all humanity</i>. This is a phenomenon in need of explanation. To understand it is to reach a theological conclusion about anti-Semitism. It is also a vital clue in deciphering the place of Pesaḥ in the worldview of Judaism.
The Torah is about one people, Israel, and its faith, history, and land. Yet it does not begin with one people. It opens instead with humanity as a whole: Adam and Eve, Cain and Abel, Noah and the Flood. Each represents a universal message. The story of Adam and Eve tells us that, in Rabbi Akiva’s words, “Beloved is man, for he was created in the image [of God]” (Mishna <i>Avot</i> 3:14). The story of Cain tells us of the universal danger of sibling rivalry, violence, and murder. Noah, after the Flood, represents all humanity in covenant with God. These are the universals of the human condition. Then comes a narrative that marks the transition from the universal (Noah) to the particular (Abraham): the story of Babel. It begins with a dramatic statement: “The entire world had one language with uniform words” (Gen. 11:1). Babel – a reference to the great city-states of Mesopotamia – is a symbol of empire, a single civilization imposed by force on a mass of individuals. Today, historians of the ancient world call this type of civilization “cosmological,” meaning that it projected its hierarchy on the heavens. It believed that its social structure mirrored the cosmos. The Torah tells us, without immediately explaining why, that there is something fundamentally wrong with this kind of order. God confuses the speech of Babel’s builders and then, in the next chapter, calls on Abraham to make a lonely journey into an unknown future. From then until the end of days there will be no universal language, culture, or civilization. There will indeed be a universal moral code, the code of Noah, but no universal religion.
It is difficult to overestimate the originality and power of this idea. Having made mankind in His image and made a covenant with all humanity, God turns to one individual, one extended family, one people, and asks it to be different, <i>thereby teaching mankind the dignity of difference</i>. The word <i>kadosh</i>, “holy,” in the Torah means just that: different, distinctive, set apart. What is wrong with universal civilizations, the echoes of Babel through the ages, is that they sacrifice the individual to the collective. They make men serve the state instead of making the state serve mankind. They impose an artificial unity on a divinely created diversity. Our humanity exists not despite but precisely because of our individual uniqueness. As the Mishna puts it in one of rabbinic Judaism’s most profound teachings, “When a human being makes many coins in the same mint, they all come out the same. God makes every person in the same image – His image – but they are all different” (Mishna <i>Sanhedrin</i> 4:6). Judaism is a particular covenant with the universal God, because it is only in and through our particularity that we are fully human, and it is only through the institutions of particularity – families, communities, languages, and traditions, each with its own local character – that we protect and sustain our humanity.
If Babel is the Bible’s first symbol of empire, Egypt is its second. The Egyptians – so the Torah tells us, and so we know from independent sources – feared and despised strangers. At one time they had been conquered by them – the Hyksos. It is no wonder, therefore, that they had negative feelings about the <i>Ivrim</i>, the “Hebrews.” The Torah uses a strong word, <i>to’eva</i> (abomination, taboo), to describe the Egyptian attitude to nomadic shepherd peoples (Gen. 43:32, 46:34). The opening chapters of the Book of Exodus tell an eminently realistic story about the slow slide from discrimination to persecution to enslavement. The Hebrews were different and thus a threat and therefore to be subject to progressive dehumanization, a pattern that Jews experienced more than once in their subsequent history. The Torah leaves no doubt as to the lesson Israel was to learn from this formative experience, stating it no fewer than thirty-six times: You shall love the stranger, because you know how it feels to be a stranger. You shall protect and respect one who is different, for you, more than any other people on earth, know what it is to be different.
To be a Jew, therefore, from the days of Abraham and Sarah to today, is to carry the burden and dignity of difference. Jews never built an empire. They never sought to become a world power, imposing their culture on others. Though the prophets foresaw the day when all mankind would worship the One God, they never envisioned a time when the nations would adopt Israel’s covenant, the Torah. The task of the people of the covenant – set out in God’s first call to Abraham – is to be true to its own faith while contributing to the good of others: “through you shall all the nations of the earth be blessed” (Gen. 12:3). Abraham fights and prays on behalf of the people of the cities of the plain, though their faith is not his. The biblical <i>ger toshav</i>, the non-Jew living within Israel’s jurisdiction, has equal rights merely by adopting the universal (Noahide) code, not by embracing the covenant of Israel. Judaism accepts converts; it does not seek them. In charging Israel to be the exemplar of the dignity of difference, therefore, God posed two challenges: one to Israel, the other to the nations of the world. For Israel, the question has always been: do we have the courage to be different? For the nations it has been: do we make space for difference? The failure of the first leads to assimilation; of the second, to anti-Semitism.
Jews have been persecuted because they are different. Under the Alexandrian and Roman empires they resisted Hellenization. Under medieval Christianity and Islam they refused conversion. Under nineteenth century European nationalism they remained a distinctive group. During each of these five civilizations they sought no special rights except the right to be themselves, true to the faith of their ancestors. At each stage, some Jews defected. Most stayed loyal. Their vision was simple, best expressed in the words of the prophet Micah:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Every man will sit under his own vine and his own fig tree,</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">And no one will make them afraid,</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">For the Lord Almighty has spoken.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">All the nations will walk, each in the name of its god;</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">We will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. (4:4–5)</span>
I know of no spiritual vision truer to the nature of this created world, with its multiplicity of faiths, languages, and cultures; none more generous in its understanding of the myriad forms of the human quest for God; none more vigilant in defense of the particular, the local, the relationships in which our humanity is expressed through covenants of love rather than the coercive force of power. Anti-Semitism – the paradigm case of the hatred of difference – is more than an assault against Jews. It is a flawed understanding, catastrophic in its consequences, of what it is to be human.
If I am right, three conclusions follow: one for Jews, a second for anti-Semites, a third for humanity as a whole.
For Jews, the response to anti-Semitism must be to fight it but never to internalize it or accept it on its own terms. Racial anti-Semitism, product of a late nineteenth century Europe that saw itself as the summit of civilization, eventually cost the lives of six million Jews. But it left another, less visible scar. One mistake made by good, honorable, and reflective Jews was to believe that since Jews were the objects of anti-Semitism, they were also its cause. They argued that since Jews were hated because they were different, they should try, as much as they could, not to be different. Some converted; others assimilated; yet others reformulated Judaism to eliminate as far as possible all that made Jews and Judaism distinctive. When these attempts failed – as they did, not only in nineteenth-century France, Germany, and Austria but also in fifteenth-century Spain – some internalized the failure. Thus was born the tortured psychology known as Jewish self-hatred: the result of Jews’ ceasing to define themselves as a nation loved by God and instead seeing themselves as the people hated by gentiles. It was a tragic error. Anti-Semitism is not caused by Jews; they are merely its targets. We now know that there can be anti-Semitism in countries where there are no Jews at all. Hatred is something that can happen to us, but it is not who we are. It can never be the basis of an identity.
One episode, told by a rabbinic colleague, has long lingered in my mind. It took place in Russia in the early 1990s, following the collapse of communism. For the first time in seventy years, Jews were free to live openly as Jews, but at the same time anti-Semitic attitudes, long suppressed, came to the surface. A British rabbi had gone there to help with the reconstruction of Jewish life, and was one day visited by a young lady in distress. “All my life,” she said, “I hid the fact that I was a Jew, and no one ever commented on my Jewishness. Now, though, when I walk past, my neighbors mutter, ‘<i>Zhid</i> (Jew).’ What shall I do?” The rabbi replied, “If you had not told me you were Jewish, I would never have known. But with my hat and beard, no one could miss the fact that I am a Jew. Yet, in all the months I have been here, no one has shouted, ‘<i>Zhid</i>!’ at me. Why do you think that is?” The girl was silent for a moment and then said, “Because they know that if they shout ‘<i>Zhid</i>!’ at me, I will take it as an insult, but if they shout ‘<i>Zhid</i>!’ at you, you will take it as a compliment.” That is a deep insight. Beyond eternal vigilance, the best way for Jews to combat anti-Semitism is to wear their identity with pride.
To anti-Semites, we must say this: we will never return hate with hate. To be a Jew is to work for peace and justice; revenge belongs to God, not us. Yet there is a truth that must also be spoken, namely that anti-Semitism is a profound psychological dysfunction, a disease masquerading as a cure. When bad things happen to a person or group, there are two questions they can ask: “How can I put it right?” or “Who did this to me?” Asking the first defines me as a subject, a moral agent, a responsible self. Asking the second identifies me as an object, a victim; and a victim can feel only resentment and rage.
There is an immense appeal to the culture of victimhood. It wins sympathy and the suspension of moral judgment. Its cost, however, is higher still, for defining oneself as a victim – anti-Semites always do – involves the systematic denial of responsibility. Dostoevsky once wrote that “If God does not exist, all is permitted” (<i>Crime and Punishment</i>). That is untrue. But if <i>responsibility</i> does not exist, then all is permitted; and few phenomena have relieved more people of more responsibility than the mythical belief that there exists a group responsible for all the evils in the world, and the simultaneous knowledge, at some other level of consciousness, that it is in fact so vulnerable that it can be attacked with impunity.
It is no accident that throughout history, and no less so today, anti-Semitism has been the weapon of choice of tyrants, dictators, holders of nondemocratic power, and rulers of totalitarian states. It appeals because it deflects public unrest at hunger, poverty, ignorance, disease, economic inequalities, bribery, corruption, and denial of human rights. It redirects indignation from its proper object to a mythical enemy charged with supernatural powers to control the world. That is why those who care for freedom, democracy, and the rule of law must never cease to remind us that in the long run anti-Semitism harms those who practice it no less than those against whom it is practiced. The culture of victimhood, so fashionable today, never liberates, but only perpetuates the condition of the victim.
To humanity, the argument must be simple and direct. Anti-Semitism – the hatred of difference – is an assault not on Jews only but on the human condition. Life is sacred because each person – even genetically identical twins – is different, therefore irreplaceable and nonsubstitutable. Every language, culture, and civilization (provided that it satisfies the minimum conditions of a universal moral code) has its own integrity, and because each is different, each adds something unique to the collective heritage of mankind. Cultural diversity is as essential to our social ecology as biodiversity is to our natural ecology. A world without room for Jews is one that has no room for difference, and a world that lacks space for difference lacks space for humanity itself.

Pesah and the Rebirth of Israel

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>Now we are here; next year in the land of Israel.</i></small></span>
<span class="poetry indentAll"><small>Now – slaves; next year we shall be free. (Haggada)</small></span>
In January 1895, a young Viennese journalist, Theodor Herzl, reporting on the Dreyfus trial in Paris, was shocked by the sight of crowds shouting, “<i>A mort les juifs</i>!” – “Death to the Jews!” Anti-Semitism, he realized, was alive and strong, not only in places like Russia, where in 1881 pogroms had broken out in more than a hundred towns, but in France itself, home of the revolution, the secular state, and the Declaration of the Rights of Man. He became a man transformed. Within a year he had written his response, which he called <i>Der Judenstaat</i>, “The Jewish State.” In it he summed up the disillusionment of a century of Jewish life, in which the hopes of European enlightenment and emancipation had proved so false:
<span class="poetry indentAll">We have sincerely tried everywhere to merge with the national communities in which we live, seeking only to preserve the faith of our fathers. It is not permitted us. In vain are we loyal patriots, sometimes superloyal; in vain do we make the same sacrifices of life and property as our fellow citizens; in vain do we strive to enhance the fame of our native lands in the arts and sciences, or her wealth by trade and commerce. In our native lands where we have lived for centuries we are still decried as aliens, often by men whose ancestors had not yet come at a time when Jewish sighs had long been heard in the country.</span>
There was, he argued, only one solution to anti-Semitism. If the nation-states of Europe were so hostile to Jews, then Jews must have a state of their own. He was not the first secular Jew to reach this conclusion. Judah Leib Pinsker had said the same in 1882 in the wake of the pogroms. Moses Hess, onetime friend and mentor of Karl Marx, had done so even earlier, in 1862. But there was something altogether compelling about Herzl. Tall, impressive, persuasive, he threw himself into political activity like a man possessed, traveling around Europe, speaking to statesmen, arguing his case with conviction and charm, never admitting the possibility of defeat. Within a year, in 1897, he had succeeded in convening the first Zionist Congress, writing in his diary on September 3 the famous words, “At Basel I founded the Jewish state. If I said this out loud today, I would be answered by universal laughter. Perhaps in five years, certainly in fifty, everyone will know it.” Fifty years later, on November 29, 1947, the United Nations General Assembly voted to bring a Jewish state into being, and on May 15, 1948, Israel was born.
Herzl died in 1904, at age forty-four, worn out by his eight years of frenetic activity for the Zionist cause. In 1902 he published a novel, <i>Altneuland</i>, setting out the Israel of his dreams. In one of the key scenes, he tells how the assimilated Dr. Friedrich Loewenberg – Herzl’s thinly disguised self-portrait – rediscovers his religious roots while attending a seder service. This is how Herzl describes it:
<span class="poetry indentAll">And so the ritual went on, half religious ceremony and half family meal, moving for anyone who had a heart to be moved by ancient custom. For this most Jewish of Jewish festivals reached back farther into ancient times than any living customs of the civilized world. It was celebrated now, exactly as it had been observed for hundreds and hundreds of years. The world had changed, nations had vanished from the face of the earth, others had made their way into the annals of history…and only this one nation was still here, cherishing its ancient customs, true to itself, remembering the sufferings of its ancestors. It still prays in the ancient language and the ancient formulas to the Eternal God, this nation of slaves and now of free men – Israel.</span>
So the story of the first exodus inspired a new return to Zion.
What is it to see the presence of God in history? The question is exceptionally difficult to answer. Ancient societies were interested in the past. They, like we, wanted to know how we came to be here, why society was the way it was, and how the universe was formed. Yet none before ancient Israel saw the unfolding of events as intrinsically meaningful, a narrative of redemption. Indeed, virtually all later societies who came to share this vision did so under the influence of the Hebrew Bible. As the historian J. H. Plumb puts it: “The concept that within the history of mankind itself a process was at work which would mold his future, and lead man to situations totally different from his past, seems to have found its first expression amongst the Jews” (<i>The Death of the Past</i>). In and through their religious vision, “the past became more than a collection of tales, a projection of human experience, or a system of moral examples…. It became an intimate part of destiny, and an interpretation of the future.” Nothing illustrates this more profoundly than the way the story of the Exodus shaped the Jewish imagination, not only of successive generations of those who lived their lives by faith, but even of profoundly secular figures like Hess, Pinsker, and Herzl.
The sequence of exile and homecoming, exodus and redemption, seems from the very beginning to have been part of the basic structure of Jewish consciousness. Adam and Eve are exiled from Eden. Cain is sentenced to a life of exile. The builders of Babel are scattered throughout the earth. Sin – a disturbance of the order of the universe – leads to exile and displacement. Already foreshadowed in these opening chapters is the possibility of an end of days in which mankind, repenting its sins, experiences a collective homecoming. In Isaiah’s words, “The wolf shall live with the sheep and the leopard lie down with the kid…. They will neither harm nor destroy in all My holy mountain, for the earth will be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea” (11:6–9) – a new Eden, in other words, and a benign flood. This, for the Hebrew Bible, is the metaphysical structure of history as a whole: harmony, broken by wrongdoing, followed by exile, then acknowledgment and atonement, and eventual return to harmony.
It is with Abraham and Sarah and their descendants, however, that this pattern becomes vivid in a concrete historical way. One of the most striking facts about the patriarchal families is that they all experience exile. Abraham and Isaac are both forced, through famine, to travel to the land of the Philistines. Jacob suffers exile twice, once to escape Esau, a second time to be rejoined with his son Joseph. In none of these is exile the result of sin, and it is the first instance that provides the interpretive clue to the rest. It occurs in the twelfth chapter of Genesis, almost immediately after God’s call to Abraham to leave his land, birthplace, and father’s house. No sooner has he done so than we read: “There was a famine in the land, and Abram went down to Egypt” (Gen. 12:10). He senses danger, fearing that the Egyptians will kill him and take Sarai into the royal harem. Sarai, saying that she is Abram’s sister, is indeed taken into Pharaoh’s palace, which is then visited by a series of plagues. Pharaoh then sends the couple away.
The episode seems to disturb the narrative logic of the patriarchal story. Why, if God wants Abraham to go to the land of Canaan, does He force him to leave almost as soon as he has arrived? Midrash Raba, an early rabbinic commentary, gives what is undoubtedly the correct answer:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The Holy One, blessed be He, said to our father Abraham, “Go forth and tread a path for your children.” For you find that everything written in connection with Abraham is written in connection with his children. Of Abraham it is written, <i>And there was a famine in the land</i> [Gen. 12:10], and of Israel it is written, <i>For these two years there has been famine in the land</i> [45:6]. Of Abraham: <i>And Abram went down to Egypt</i> [ibid.]. Of Israel: <i>And our fathers went down into Egypt</i> [Num. 20:15]. Of Abraham: <i>To reside there</i> [ibid.]. Of Israel: <i>We have come to reside in this land</i> [Gen. 47:4]. (<i>Genesis Raba</i> 40:6)</span>
And so on through a long series of linguistic and substantive parallels between Abraham’s fate and the later experience of the Israelites. The exiles of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are, in other words, prefigurations of what would later happen to their descendants. It is as if the patriarchs and matriarchs of the Jewish people had <i>rehearsed in advance</i> the fate of their children, not necessarily knowing they were doing so, but nonetheless <i>laying the foundations of future hope</i>. The Israelites, exiled and enslaved, would be liberated and redeemed, not only because God said so, but because He had <i>done so</i> in the past. He had already shown, several times in different ways, that He was with the ancestors of the nation, protecting them and bringing them safely back.
By the time we open the Book of Exodus, we already know something of immense significance. History is full of unpredictable reversals. Joseph had given the Israelites a haven in the land of Egypt, but there was always the possibility of “a new king who knew not Joseph” (Ex. 1:8). A protected minority can become a vulnerable minority. There is nothing in the Bible or Jewish faith that speaks of historical inevitability. To live in time is to be exposed to the hazards of time. But Israel knows from its own history that however long it may seem to be delayed, redemption is at hand. God will bring deliverance in the future because He has done so in the past.
It was this that, at a later stage in Jewish history, formed the basis of the vision of hope that is shared by all the prophets. Israel might suffer exile again, but it would return. “They will come speedily,” prophesies Hosea, “flying like birds out of Egypt” (11:11). “I will restore the fortunes of My people Israel,” says Amos in the name of God. “They shall rebuild deserted cities and live in them, they shall plant vineyards and drink their wine, make gardens and eat their fruit” (9:14). Moses himself, in one of his darkest visions, ends with the unshakable assurance: “Even so, when they are in the land of their enemies I shall not reject them and shall not detest them to the point of destruction, to the point of breaking My covenant with them, for I am the Lord their God; I shall remember for them the covenant of the early ones, those I took out of the land of Egypt before the eyes of the nations, in order to be their God: I am the Lord” (Lev. 26:44–45). Micah said it simply: “As in the days when you came out of Egypt, I will show them My wonders” (7:15). What was would be again.
The Exodus was more than an event in the past. It was a precursor of redemption in the future. Israel, as Moses warned, would not dwell securely in its land. It would forget its moral and spiritual vocation. It would be attracted to the pagan culture of its neighbors. By so doing it would lose its reason for existence and find itself unable, at times of crisis, to summon the shared vision and collective energy needed to prevail against neighboring imperial powers. It would suffer defeat and exile; it would undergo its dark night of the soul; it would, as Ezekiel said, utter the fateful words <i>avda tikvateinu</i>, “our hope is destroyed” (37:11). But despair would never prevail. In the past, God had brought His people from slavery to freedom and from exile to the land, and therefore He would do so again. The Jewish people never completely lost faith in God, because its prophets knew that God would never completely lose faith in His people. History intimated destiny. What happened once would happen again. That is what lies behind the words with which the Haggada begins: “Now we are here; next year in the land of Israel. Now – slaves; next year we shall be free.” The Jewish people kept the vision alive. It is not too much to say that the vision kept the Jewish people alive. It is difficult at this distance in time to realize the depth of the crisis represented by the destruction of the Second Temple in the year 70 ce, and the later suppression of the disastrous Bar Kokhba revolt (132–35 ce). The very foundations of Jewish existence had been destroyed. There was now no Temple or Jewish sovereignty. There were no kings or priests or prophets. Jerusalem had been razed to the ground and rebuilt as a Roman city, Aelia Capitolina, in which Jews were forbidden to live.
More than six centuries earlier, following the destruction of the First Temple, the people had come close to despair. A psalm from that period has left us with an indelible record of their mood: “By the rivers of Babylon we sat and wept as we remembered Zion…. How can we sing the Lord’s song on foreign soil?” (137:1–4) That moment, though, brought its own consolation. There were prophets of the stature of Jeremiah and Ezekiel to assure the people that they would return. The exile would be finite, temporary. It would last, at most, a single lifetime; and their intuition proved correct. There was no such assurance in Roman times. To be sure, figures like Rabbi Akiva were confident that redemption would come. But his hopes were invested in Bar Kokhba, and when that uprising failed, so too did any hope that Israel’s fortunes would be restored in the foreseeable future.
A midrash on Jacob’s dream of a ladder and angels tells us something of the mood of those times:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The Holy One, blessed be He, showed Jacob the angel of Babylon ascending and descending, the angel of Media ascending and descending, the angel of Greece ascending and descending, and the angel of Rome ascending [but not descending]. Jacob was afraid. He thought: Is it possible this one will never descend? The Holy One, blessed be He, said to him: <i>Fear not, My servant Jacob</i> [Jer. 46:27]. (Tanḥuma, <i>Vayetzeh</i> 2)</span>
Every other exile had a finite duration, but the fall of Israel under Rome seemed to extend indefinitely into the future.
What happened next is one of the great, if quiet, dramas of history. The Jewish people, so bound to time and space – seeing God in history and its home in a specific land – reconstituted itself as a nation <i>outside</i> time and space. Prayer took the place of sacrifice. The study of Torah replaced prophecy. Repentance became a substitute for the great ritual of atonement performed by the high priest in the Holy of Holies. The synagogue – a building that could be anywhere – became a fragment of the Temple in Jerusalem. The Jewish people itself, once a nation in its own land, became a virtual community scattered through space, bound now by a mystical sense of collective responsibility (Israel, said Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai, is “like a single body with a single soul: when one is afflicted, all feel the pain”). In exile everywhere, Jews were at home in a text. The Torah, said the German poet Heinrich Heine, became “the portable homeland of the Jew.”
These developments did not happen overnight. In a sense, Jews had been preparing them ever since the Babylonian exile. It was then, beginning with Ezra, that a succession of scribes, scholars, and sages began to reshape Israel from the people of the land to the people of the book. The result was that Jews succeeded in doing what no other people has ever done. They sustained their identity and way of life through almost two thousand years of exile. Despite the hostility showed to them – Max Weber once described them as a “pariah people” – they kept their dignity and self-respect. And through some of the worst sufferings ever experienced by a group, they preserved their hope: “Next year in Jerusalem; next year free.” There is nothing remotely comparable in history. It was the triumph of faith over circumstance.
But there was a price to be paid, namely the almost complete depoliticization of Judaism. To be sure, from the first to the nineteenth centuries, Jews had self-governing powers. They ran their own communities, arbitrated internal disputes, and created not just synagogues but also remarkable educational and welfare institutions. But the disastrous failure of the two rebellions against Rome, in 66 and 132 ce, left their mark. Jews did not thereafter fight for their independence. They did not mobilize for their return to Israel. They had learned at great cost that these initiatives were likely to backfire, bringing devastation in their wake. Instead, following the advice of the prophet Jeremiah in an earlier age, they sought “the peace of the city to which they were exiled” (29:7), waiting patiently for God to bring His people back to Zion.
The tension of waiting was sometimes unbearable, and this gave rise throughout the Middle Ages to a series of messianic movements in which a would-be savior appeared, promising deliverance. The most famous of these – Shabbetai Tzvi in the seventeenth century – was in fact only one of many (Maimonides mentions several in his father’s lifetime alone). But these movements, beginning in fevered hope and ending in disillusionment, only served to underscore how dangerous it was to “force the end.” Jews believed they would return to Israel, but there was no natural, nonmiraculous route from here to there. Throughout the Middle Ages, individual Jews made the journey to the Holy Land, among them Judah Halevi and Nahmanides. There was always a Jewish presence there, though sometimes small and in dire circumstances. In the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, followers of both the Hasidic movement and their opponents, disciples of the Vilna Gaon, made their way to Israel in significant numbers. But they came to wait for redemption, not to initiate it.
Three factors changed Jewish attitudes in the course of the nineteenth century. The first was the rise of European nationalism. If the Italians could win their independence, why not the Jews? There was ferment in the air following the French Revolution. A new political era seemed to be dawning, with messianic possibilities. It was no less a figure than Napoleon who, setting out to conquer the Middle East in 1799, issued a call to Jews: “Israelites, arise! Now is the moment which may not return for generations to claim back the rights you have been deprived of for thousands of years, to live again as a nation among nations.” How serious an offer this was was never put to the test. Napoleon was forced to abandon his military campaign. But a note had been struck and it was echoed, not least in Britain, during the course of the nineteenth century. Figures like Lord Shaftesbury and Colonel Charles Churchill began to advocate Jewish settlement in the Holy Land, partly as a way of advancing British interests in the region, but also, and no less, out of a deep belief in the biblical prophecies and a sense that the time was right. The English novelist George Eliot made the rebirth of Jewish nationalism a central theme of her book <i>Daniel Deronda</i> (1876). The Damascus Blood Libel of 1840, in which Sir Moses Montefiore and Adolf Cremieux, the lay leaders of British and French Jewry, successfully intervened, demonstrated for the first time the possibility of international Jewish diplomacy. It was in this context that two rabbis, Yehudah Alkalai and Tzvi Hirsch Kalischer, began to outline a religious Zionism, based less on a state than on agricultural settlements. What was novel in their work was the suggestion that though, ultimately, redemption rested with God, the preliminary steps should be taken by Jews themselves.
The second development was a certain secularization of Jewish history. I use this word with some trepidation, but there is no other. It began with Spinoza, a Jew who broke with Judaism, but who in his <i>Tractatus Theologico-Politicus</i> (1670) first raised the possibility that Jews might take hold of their fate and reestablish a Jewish state. Spinoza did not believe in a God of history, and thus thought about religion in purely natural terms. No less significant was the influence of the nineteenth-century historian Heinrich Graetz, whose writings did much to stimulate Jewish interest and pride in the past. Hess, Pinsker, and Herzl were part of the legacy of this process. Seeing themselves as secular Jews, they did not feel constrained merely to wait and pray for Jewish liberty. The earliest of them, Hess, was also the most insightful. He guessed what Herzl later discovered, that support for Jewish nationalism would come not from the culturally integrated Jews of the West but from the religious heartlands of Eastern Europe. It was the meeting of secular and religious that brought about what neither could have done on their own.
The third and decisive factor, however, was the rise in anti-Semitism in the second half of the nineteenth century. It was this that made the return not merely possible but urgent and necessary. The irony is that this seems to have been foreseen from the beginning. In Babylon in the sixth century bce Ezekiel had already prophesied: “You say, ‘We want to be like the nations, like the peoples of the world’ but what you have in mind will never happen. As surely as I live, declares the Sovereign Lord, I will rule over you with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm and outpoured rage” (20:33). The mishnaic teacher Rabbi Yehoshua predicted that an evil ruler would arise “whose decrees will be as harsh as those of Haman” and drive Jews back to their faith and land. What is common to both these teachings is the belief that Jews would not seek to return of their own accord. They might try to assimilate, but they would fail. Love of the land would not be enough to move Jews to action. The hostility of their neighbors would.
So Zionism was born. It would be hard to find any other movement that brought together so many dissonant, competing visions. There were utopian religious Zionists like Rav Avraham Kook and practical religious Zionists like Rabbi Yitzhak Yaakov Reines. Among the secularists were political Zionists like Herzl, cultural Zionists such as Ahad HaAm, Nietzscheans like Berdichevski, Tolstoyans of the caliber of Aaron David Gordon, and dozens of others, each with his own carefully wrought utopia. They clashed, at times vehemently. Yet out of their clamorous discord came one of the most astonishing achievements of all time.
The creation of the State of Israel was fraught with difficulty. Despite the Balfour Declaration (1917), in which Britain, the new mandatory power in Palestine, promised Jews a national home, there was intense opposition – from the Arab world, from other international forces, from politicians in Britain, and at times from Jews themselves. For thirty years, various compromises were proposed, all accepted by Jews and rejected by their opponents. On the day the State of Israel was proclaimed, it was attacked on all fronts by its neighbors. Since then it has lived under constant threat of war, violence, terror, and delegitimization. Yet it has achieved wondrous things.
Through it Hebrew, the language of the Bible, was reborn as a living tongue. Jewish communities under threat have been rescued, including those like the Jews of Ethiopia who had little contact with other Jews for centuries. Jews have come to Israel from over a hundred countries, representing the entire lexicon of cultural diversity. A desolate landscape has bloomed again. Jerusalem has been rebuilt. The world of Torah scholarship, devastated by the Holocaust, has been revived and the sound of learning echoes throughout the land. Economically, politically, socially, and culturally, Israel’s achievements are unmatched by any country of its age and size. The sages said that, at the crossing of the Red Sea, the simplest Jew saw miracles that the greatest of later prophets were not destined to see. That, surely, was the privilege of those who witnessed Israel’s rebirth and youth. The Messiah has not come. Israel is not yet at peace. The Temple has not been rebuilt. Our time is not yet redemption. Yet many of the prayers of two thousand years have been answered. No one, reviewing this singular history, can doubt that faith makes a difference; that a nation’s history is shaped by what it believes.
Judah Halevi once compared the Jewish people to a seed. In his <i>Kuzari</i>, a fictional dialogue between a rabbi and the king of the Khazars, the king asks the rabbi a pointed question. How is it that, if you are truly chosen by God, you are everywhere subjected to humiliation and persecution? Where is your greatness? The rabbi replies: We are like the seed of a great tree. When first planted in the ground it appears to disintegrate. But it is actually all the while gathering strength to grow. Eventually it will put forth roots and shoots and begin to reach toward heaven.
That is what Pesaḥ was during more than eighteen centuries of exile and dispersion: a seed planted in Jewish memory, waiting to be activated and to grow. Without it Jews would certainly have disappeared. Lacking hope of return – hope tempered by faith into a certainty like steel – they would have made their peace with their condition, merged into their surrounding societies and ambient cultures, and vanished, like every other culture deprived of a home. Pesaḥ, like a seed frozen in suspended animation, contained the latent energy that led Jews in the twentieth century to create the single most remarkable accomplishment in the modern world, the rebirth of Israel, the land, the state, the nation, and the people. Micah’s vision, and Ezekiel’s, and Moses’, came true.
The Irish historian Conor Cruise O’Brien once remarked that Jews who see themselves as unreligious are sometimes very religious indeed. That was true of Hess, Pinsker, Herzl, Chaim Weizmann, David Ben-Gurion, and many other heroes and pioneers of the return to Zion. They were not “spiritual” nor did they observe many of the commandments. But the vision of the prophets and the covenant of Jewish history flowed through their veins. God works through people; sometimes, so the prophets taught, without their conscious knowledge and consent. It is difficult to reflect deeply on the rebirth of Israel without sensing the touch of heaven in the minds of men and women, leading them to play their parts in a drama so much greater than any individual could have executed, even conceived. The historian Barbara Tuchman writes, “Viewing this strange and singular history one cannot escape the impression that it must contain some special significance for the history of mankind, that in some way, whether one believes in divine providence or inscrutable circumstance, the Jews have been singled out to carry the tale of human fate” (<i>Bible and Sword: England and Palestine from the Bronze Age to Balfour</i>).
Who, then, wrote the script of the Jewish drama? God or the Jewish people? Or was it, as the sages taught, an inextricable combination of both: God as He was heard by the people, and the people as they responded to God? Isaac Bashevis Singer came close when he said, “God is a writer and we are both the heroes and the readers.” One thing is certain, that without Pesaḥ, celebrated over the centuries, the State of Israel would not have been born. The prophets were right: the Exodus of the past contained within it the Exodus of the future; and I, born in the same year as the state, can only say, “Blessed are You, O Lord…who has given life, sustained us, and brought us to this time.”

An Afternoon in Jerusalem

<i>Next year in Jerusalem rebuilt</i>! (Haggada)
It happened in Jerusalem, one Shabbat afternoon toward the end of the Gulf War. Our family had gone to the Holy City to find peace. Instead we found ourselves in the midst of war. Within weeks of our arrival it became clear that the Middle East was yet again about to be engulfed in conflict. Iraq had invaded Kuwait and a massive international force led by the United States was ready to intervene. Israel was not involved, yet we knew it would be the primary target of Iraqi weapons. So it proved to be. Thirty-nine times during those weeks we heard the sirens wail their warning of Scud missiles. Each time we put on our gas masks and retreated to our sealed rooms, not knowing where the next attack would land or whether it would contain chemical weapons. It was another reminder that it is not easy to find peace as a Jew.
Yet as we stepped out into the Jerusalem sunlight there was peace. The city breathed the stillness of Shabbat. The late afternoon sun was turning the houses, of Jerusalem stone, into burnished gold. As we looked across the valley to the walls of the Old City we could understand why, long ago, people had called this the city of peace and why, even when it lay in ruins, Jews were convinced that the Divine Presence had never left Jerusalem.
We had been invited by our neighbors to <i>Se’uda Shelishit</i>, the third Shabbat meal, the meal that symbolizes the coming together of God and the Jewish people – “You are One, Your name is one, and who is like Your people Israel, a nation unique on earth?” (Shabbat liturgy) When we arrived we discovered that they had also invited a group of Rumanian Jews who had recently come to make their home in Israel. They had made the journey as a group because they were a choir. In Rumania they had sung the songs of Jewish hope and longing. Now, in Jerusalem, they began to sing again around the table, beginning with the twenty-third Psalm, which Jews have long been accustomed to sing on Shabbat afternoon: “The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want…. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for You are with me” (23:1–4). Those words, thousands of years old, caught the mood of the moment. This was peace in the midst of war, a pool of stillness in the turmoil of the world.
Then a rather moving thing happened. As the sounds of the choir reverberated around the alleyways of our quiet corner of Jerusalem, people from the neighboring houses began to appear, drawn by the music. One by one they slipped in through the open door and stood around and, hesitantly at first, then with growing confidence, joined the singing. Here was an Israeli artist, there a new arrival from Russia, here an American investment banker, there a family from South Africa, and in the doorway a group of tourists who happened to be walking by and had stopped to see what was happening and then found themselves caught up by the embrace of the atmosphere. No one spoke; no one wanted to break the mood. We continued to sing the songs of Shabbat afternoon. As the sun began to set behind the hills, I could feel the Divine Presence among us, joining our words to those of a hundred generations of Jews, uniting them into a vast choral symphony, the love song of a people for God, and I sensed something of the mystery and majesty of the Jewish people, and I knew that it was this that I had come to Jerusalem to find.
We had come together, each of us as the result of a long journey, in some cases physical, in others spiritual, and in many, both. We each had stories to tell of how we came to be in Jerusalem that afternoon. But just as our individual voices had united to sing the words of our ancestors’ songs, so our stories were part of a larger story. Our personal routes were stages on the most remarkable journey ever undertaken by a people, spanning almost every country on the face of the earth, and four thousand years of time. If we had been able, then and there, to trace back the history of our parents and theirs across the generations, we would have been awestruck at its drama and scope. Was there anything that could remotely compare to the long Jewish journey to Jerusalem? Was this, I thought, not the most vivid testimony imaginable to the power and endurance of faith?
I thought back to the beginning of the journey, when God spoke to Abraham and Sarah and beckoned them toward an unknown land. Then, centuries later, with the Israelites enslaved in Egypt, God called Moses and told him to lead the people to freedom across the desert, to the land flowing with milk and honey. I thought of David, who consecrated Jerusalem as his capital and brought the ark of the covenant into the city, singing and dancing, and of Solomon, who built the Temple and asked God that it should become the home of the prayers of all mankind. I thought of Jeremiah, who foresaw its destruction, and Isaiah, who told the Israelites that they would one day return, and Ezra and Nehemiah, who led the people back. I thought of the Second Temple and its defilement, and of the Maccabees, who delivered it once again into Jewish hands, and of the terrible devastation that later occurred at the hands of the Romans. I recalled the story of the rabbis of the first century who wept as they saw a fox entering the ruined Holy of Holies, and of Rabbi Akiva, who comforted them and assured them that Jerusalem would one day be rebuilt.
For eighteen centuries, Jews were scattered across the world, but they never forgot Jerusalem. They prayed toward it. They mourned it even during their celebrations. Each year, on the ninth of Av, the anniversary of the destruction, they sat and wept as if they had just been bereaved. Like the survivors of an earlier catastrophe, they said, “If I forget you, Jerusalem, may my right hand forget its skill, may my tongue cling to the roof of my mouth if I do not remember you, if I do not set Jerusalem above my highest joy” (Ps. 137:5–6). Each Pesaḥ at the climax of the seder they said, <i>Leshana haba’a biYerushalayim habenuya</i>, “Next year in Jerusalem rebuilt.” The next year they said the same.
I thought of the Jews of the Middle Ages – among them Judah Halevi, Maimonides, and Nahmanides – who journeyed there, often amidst great danger. I thought of my great-grandfather who made the journey there in the 1870s, traveling from Lithuania with a <i>sefer Torah</i> in his arms, and who wrote one of the great histories of Jerusalem. I thought of those who fought in Israel’s wars, in 1948 to defend the newborn state from destruction, and who, in 1967, reunified the divided city. And I thought of us, gathered there that Shabbat afternoon singing songs of faith, finding peace in the midst of battle, and converging from our many countries of origin on the place to which Jews had so long prayed. I understood then that to be a Jew is to be part of that journey, begun by Abraham and Sarah and continued by their children ever since – not just to a place but to a set of ideals, a way of life, a state of collective grace – and that I had caught a glimpse of the eternal people joining their voices across space and time and singing its never-ending song.
At any time in those long centuries the journey might have ended. It might have done so at the very beginning, when Abraham arrived to find the land starved by famine and was compelled to travel to Egypt. It might have done so half a dozen times during Moses’ leadership when the people, fatigued and frightened by the journey, wanted to turn around and go back. It might have come to a close with the destruction of the First or Second Temples, had there not been prophets and sages to lift Jews from the abyss of despair. In their long centuries of dispersion Jews might simply have abandoned thoughts of return. But Jews are an obstinate people, and were never reconciled to the loss of Jerusalem. They carried with them the pain and the hope, the memory of the ruins and the vision of a city rebuilt. Never, after that afternoon, could I treat lightly the ideas of memory and prayer and faith. Jews never forgot Jerusalem. They prayed for it. They believed they would return. Had even one generation failed to do these things, the journey would have ended and much of Jewish history would have come to nothing. Faith had brought us to that time and place to see the fulfillment of our ancestors’ dreams.
Jerusalem is a place, but it is more than a place. It became a metaphor for the collective destination of the Jewish people. A city is what we build together, individually through our homes, collectively through our public spaces. So Jerusalem became a symbol of what Jews were summoned to build by creating a city of righteousness worthy of being a home for the Divine Presence. Its stones would be good deeds, and its mortar, relationships of generosity and trust. Its houses would be families; its defensive walls, schools and houses of study. Shabbat and the festivals would be its public parks and gardens. For Jews believed that, even in a violent and destructive world, heaven could be built on earth. It was their most daring vision. The architect of the city would be God. The builders would be ordinary men and women. It would be a Jewish city, but it would be open to all, and people from all faiths would come and be moved by its beauty.
So Jerusalem, the “faithful city” (Is. 1:21), became the destination of the Jewish journey, which began with Abraham and Sarah and will be complete only at the end of days. This is how the prophet Isaiah envisioned it, in words that for millennia have captured the human imagination:
<span class="poetry indentAll">In the last days</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">The mountain of the Lord’s Temple will be established</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">As chief among the mountains;</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">It will be raised above the hills,</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">And all the nations will stream to it.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Many peoples will come and say,</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">“Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord,</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">To the house of the God of Jacob.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">He will teach us His ways,</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">So that we may walk in His path.”</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">For the Torah shall come forth from Zion,</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">And the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">He will judge between the nations</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">And settle disputes for many peoples.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">They will beat their swords into plowshares</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">And their spears into pruning hooks.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Nation will not take up sword against nation,</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Nor will they train for war anymore. (Is. 2:2–4)</span>
These words, among the most influential ever written, sum up much of Jewish faith. They epitomize what it might be like to “perfect the world under the sovereignty of God” (<i>Aleinu</i>). And as they journeyed through the centuries and continents, Jews carried this vision with them, believing that their task was to be true to their faith, to be loyal to God, to exemplify His ways to mankind, and to build a world at peace with itself by learning and teaching how to respect the freedom and dignity of others.
As I remembered all this, I wondered at the tenacity of our ancestors. At times it must have seemed a vain hope. How, given all their suffering through the ages, did they continue to believe in the possibility of a city “redeemed by justice” (Is. 1:27), whose name was peace? Was their faith blind, or was it something else, a faith so strong that it was capable of surviving catastrophe and still believing that people could change, and therefore the world could change? Perhaps there never was a more revolutionary faith. Certainly no people has ever held to its beliefs with more tenacity.
And as the singing ended, and Shabbat drew to a close, I understood that to be a Jew is to join the journey of our people, the story of Pesaḥ and the long walk across centuries and continents from exile to homecoming. There is no story like it, and the journey is not yet complete.

The Universal Story

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>Observe [these decrees] carefully, for this is your wisdom and understanding in the eyes of the nations, who will hear about all these decrees and say, “Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.”</i> (Deut. 4:6)</small></span>
In his 1849 novel White-Jacket, Herman Melville made clear how much the American dream owed to the story of Israel:
<span class="poetry indentAll">We Americans are the peculiar, chosen people – the Israel of our time; we bear the ark of the liberties of the world. God has predestined, mankind expects, great things from our race; and great things we feel in our souls. The rest of the nations must soon be in our rear. We are pioneers of the world; the advance-guard, sent on through the wilderness of untried things, to break a new path in the New World that is ours.</span>
The story of Pesaḥ is intensely particularistic. It tells of how one people, long ago, experienced oppression and was led to liberty through a long and arduous journey across the desert. Yet no story has had greater impact on the political development of the West. Moses knew the events of his time had a significance that went far beyond those days and that people; that they would eventually become a source of inspiration to other nations. So, remarkably, it came to be. When black Americans sang, “Let my people go,” when South American liberation theologians in the 1960s based their work on the Book of Exodus, when Nelson Mandela entitled his autobiography <i>The Long Walk to Freedom</i>, each was adopting Israel’s story and making it their own. More than Plato’s <i>Republic</i> or Aristotle’s <i>Politics</i>, more than Rousseau’s <i>The Social Contract</i> or Marx’s <i>Das Kapital</i>, the Pesaḥ story has been the West’s most influential sourcebook of liberty. “Since the Exodus,” said Heinrich Heine, “freedom has always spoken with a Hebrew accent.”
Its first major impact was on the politics of England in the seventeenth century and came about as the result of three factors. The first was the Reformation, with its emphasis on the Bible, as opposed to the Church, as a source of authority. The second was the invention of printing in the mid-fifteenth century by Gutenberg in Germany and Caxton in Britain (printing had in fact been invented in China several centuries earlier, but had not spread). For the first time, books were available in large numbers and at a price ordinary people could afford, and an overwhelming proportion of the first books produced were Bibles. A million of them were in circulation in Britain by 1640. The third factor was the translation of the Bible into the vernacular, which had been resisted, even forbidden by law, until then. Tyndale’s pioneering translation was published in 1530 and was followed by many others until the King James Bible, one of the great influences on English language and literature, appeared in 1611.
The result was that for the first time, people other than priests came into direct contact with the Hebrew Bible, and its effect was immense. It taught that each individual had dignity as God’s image and was entitled to freedom from tyranny, and to equality before the law. It told of how prophets criticized kings and unjust rulers could be overthrown. The story of the Exodus itself taught the fundamental difference between might and right, power and justice, rule and authority. It introduced an ethical dimension into the politics of power.
The Hebrew Bible exercised a decisive influence on political thinkers in the seventeenth century. John Milton wrote that “there are no songs comparable to the songs of Zion; no orations equal to those of the prophets; and no politics like those which the Scriptures teach” and called the Bible “that book within whose sacred context all wisdom is enfolded.” The great political theorists of the seventeenth century, Thomas Hobbes and John Locke, cite it constantly in their works. There are 657 biblical references in <i>Leviathan</i> alone. The person, though, who did most to turn it into political reality was Oliver Cromwell, leader of the parliamentary party during England’s civil war. The English, he never tired of saying, were the “new Israel,” and in his first parliamentary speech of the protectorship, he described the Exodus as “the only parallel of God’s dealing with us that I know.”
In a square in the center of Philadelphia, in front of Independence Hall, where America’s Declaration of Independence and Constitution were drafted, stands one of the great symbols of the nation, the Liberty Bell, visited by more than a million tourists each year. Around the top of the bell are words taken from the twenty-fifth chapter of Leviticus: “Proclaim liberty throughout the land to all the inhabitants thereof” (v. 10). The presence of this biblical quotation is no coincidence. It exemplifies the close relationship between the Hebrew Bible and America’s founders. More even than in the case of England under Cromwell, America was the great attempt to construct a society along biblical lines, following in the footsteps of Moses.
Already in 1620 the Pilgrim Fathers, seeing themselves as a “continuation and extension of the Jewish church,” pledged themselves in a covenant to create a body politic, inspired by the example of biblical Israel, and frame “just and equal laws.” In 1776, in Philadelphia itself, Benjamin Franklin and Thomas Jefferson met to design a seal for the new United States. Franklin proposed that it should bear a picture of Moses lifting his staff to divide the Red Sea, together with the motto “Rebellion to tyrants is obedience to God.” Jefferson preferred a less aggressive design: the Israelites in the wilderness being led by a cloud by day and a pillar of fire at night (Ex. 13:21). In 1799, delivering a Thanksgiving sermon in Massachusetts, Abiel Abbot expressed an idea that by then was widely held: “It has often been remarked that the people of the United States come nearer to a parallel with Ancient Israel, than any other nation upon the globe. Hence ‘Our American Israel’ is a term frequently used; and common consent allows it apt and proper.” England was Egypt, America the Promised Land, and the United States the fulfillment of the old-new journey to liberty.
No one expressed more fulsomely the debt owed to the story of Israel than America’s second president, John Adams, who in 1809 wrote to a friend:
<span class="poetry indentAll">I will insist that the Hebrews have done more to civilize men than any other nation. If I were an atheist, and believed in blind eternal fate, I should still believe that fate had ordained the Jews to be the most essential instrument for civilizing the nations. If I were an atheist of the other sect, who believe or pretend to believe that all is ordered by chance, I should believe that chance had ordered the Jews to preserve and propagate to all mankind the doctrine of a supreme, intelligent, wise, almighty sovereign of the universe, which I believe to be the great essential principle of all morality, and consequently of all civilization.</span>
The supreme expression of the American faith was the Declaration of Independence (1776), largely drafted by Jefferson. In one of the most famous of all political affirmations, it stated: “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” The striking thing about this sentence is that “these truths” are anything <i>but</i> self-evident. Most societies at most times have held as self-evidently true that men are created <i>un</i>equal. Some are born to rule, others to be ruled. Every ancient myth, dogma, and creed with the exception of the Hebrew Bible was a justification for inequality and hierarchy, a canonization of the status quo. Plato held that society was stratified into three classes: guardians (philosopher-kings), auxiliaries (soldiers), and the rest; and that whether or not these distinctions were given by birth, people should be taught that they were. Aristotle believed that some people were born to be slaves. Gradations of class were written into the structure of reality. The strong, powerful, wealthy, and highborn were meant (whether by nature or by God) to exercise supremacy over others. Jefferson’s “truths” were self-evident only to a culture steeped in the Hebrew Bible, from its opening declaration that the human individual is “the image of God,” to its enactment in history in the Exodus and the covenant at Mount Sinai.
We owe to Robert Bellah the idea that America has a “civil religion” – a set of beliefs and a shared narrative, a faith, that underlie its public and political life. One of the great differences between the United States and Europe is that political, especially presidential, discourse continues to be religious to this day. Every inaugural address, with the sole exception of Washington’s second (hardly a speech at all; it contains a mere two paragraphs), refers to God. There is, at it were, a public theology that has been part of America’s political culture throughout.
What is fascinating is that this civil religion differs in significant respects from America’s congregational life, which is overwhelmingly Christian. American presidents do not tend to speak in explicitly Christian terms. They talk instead of divine providence and the sovereignty of God. They refer to covenant and the moral bonds by which societies are sustained. The liberty of which they speak is biblical rather than libertarian: a matter less of rights than of responsibilities, not the freedom to do what one likes, but the freedom to do what is correct and thus contribute to the common good. They invoke an essentially Mosaic narrative of America as the Promised Land to which successive generations of immigrants have come to find freedom from oppression and build, in John Winthrop’s famous phrase, “a city upon a hill.”
This uniquely American rhetoric deserves more attention than it has received. It is not merely a <i>façon de parler</i>, an empty convention, but the way successive generations of citizens have understood and rededicated themselves to the terms of their shared project. Regardless of whether individual presidents have been religious (Eisenhower once reportedly said, “Our government makes no sense unless it is founded in a deeply felt religious faith – and I don’t care what it is”), they have had to adopt this language in order to keep faith with the past. Its connection with Pesaḥ is direct. The great American political addresses are the most sustained attempt in the modern world to place the themes of exodus, redemption, and the presence of God in history at the center of public life.
The vision was first set out by Winthrop aboard the <i>Arabella</i> in 1630 as it sailed for New England. Speaking in conscious imitation of Moses at the end of his life, he invited his fellow settlers to “enter into a covenant” with God and to “follow the counsel of Micah, to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with our God.” If they failed to live up to the covenant, “the Lord will surely break out in wrath against us,” but if they were true to its terms, “The Lord will be our God, and delight to dwell among us, as His own people, and will command a blessing upon us in all our ways.” They would then find “that the God of Israel is among us” (<i>A Model of Christian Charity</i>).
Early American presidents did not use such explicitly biblical language. A hundred and fifty years had passed, and unlike the Pilgrim Fathers they were speaking not to a sect but to what had become a great and independent nation. Yet their sentiments were the same. In the first inaugural, in 1789, George Washington declared, “It would be peculiarly improper to omit in this first official act my fervent supplications to that Almighty Being who rules over the universe,” and warned that “the propitious smiles of Heaven can never be expected on a nation that disregards the eternal rules of order and right which Heaven itself has ordained.” In his second inaugural (1805), Thomas Jefferson alluded to the Exodus: “I shall need, too, the favor of that Being in whose hands we are, who led our fathers, as Israel of old, from their native land and planted them in a country flowing with all the necessaries and comforts of life.”
It might be thought that this kind of language would have been confined to those early years of independence, when the sense was still strong that something great, even miraculous, was at work in America. Yet in 1961, John F. Kennedy was still using the same biblical cadences:
<span class="poetry indentAll">I have sworn before you and Almighty God the same solemn oath our forebears prescribed nearly a century and three-quarters ago. The world is very different now. For man holds in his mortal hands the power to abolish all forms of human poverty and all forms of human life. And yet the same revolutionary beliefs for which our forebears fought are still at issue around the globe – the belief that the rights of man come not from the generosity of the state, but from the hand of God…. With a good conscience our only sure reward, with history the final judge of our deeds, let us go forth to lead the land we love, asking His blessing and His help, but knowing that here on earth God’s work must truly be our own.</span>
Succeeding the assassinated Kennedy, Lyndon Baines Johnson gave a particularly striking account of “the American covenant”:
<span class="poetry indentAll">They came here – the exile and the stranger, brave but frightened – to find a place where a man could be his own man. They made a covenant with this land. Conceived in justice, written in liberty, bound in union, it was meant one day to inspire the hopes of all mankind; and it binds us still. If we keep its terms, we shall flourish…. Under this covenant of justice, Liberty, and union we have become a nation – prosperous, great, and mighty. And we have kept our freedom. But we have no promise from God that our greatness will endure. We have been allowed by Him to seek greatness with the sweat of our hands and the strength of our spirit.</span>
In 2001, the vision still drove George W. Bush. Pledging himself to work for a nation of justice and opportunity, he added:
<span class="poetry indentAll">I know this is in our reach because we are guided by a power larger than ourselves who creates us equal in His image…. Americans are generous and strong and decent, not because we believe in ourselves, but because we hold beliefs beyond ourselves…. We are not this [nation’s] story’s author, who fills time and eternity with His purpose. Yet His purpose is achieved in our duty, and our duty is fulfilled in service to one another.</span>
No other country in the West uses this intensely religious vocabulary. It is particularly striking in view of the fact that the American Constitution, in the form of the First Amendment, formally separates religion and state.
It was the great French writer Alexis de Tocqueville who in the 1830s, in the course of his classic <i>Democracy in America</i>, explained the paradox. There was a separation between religion and state, but not between religion and society. “Religion in America,” he wrote, “takes no direct part in the government of society, but it must be regarded as the first of their political institutions.” What he meant was that, though it had no power, it had enormous influence. It sustained families. It bound communities together. It prompted people to join voluntary organizations for the promotion of the common good. It was the basis of a shared morality that, precisely because it was upheld by faith, did not constantly have to be enforced by law. “In France,” he noted, “I had almost always seen the spirit of religion and the spirit of freedom marching in opposite directions. In America I found they were intimately united and that they reigned in common over the same country.”
In a strange way civil religion has the same relationship to the United States as Pesaḥ does to the Jewish people. It is, first and foremost, not a philosophy but a story. It tells of how a persecuted group escaped from the old world and made a hazardous journey to an unknown land, there to construct a new society, in Abraham Lincoln’s famous words, “conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.” Like the Pesaḥ story, it must be told repeatedly, as it is in every inaugural address. It defines the nation, not merely in terms of its past but also as a moral-spiritual commitment to the future. It is no accident that the founders of America turned to the Hebrew Bible, or that successive presidents have done likewise, because there is no other text in Western literature that draws these themes – history, providence, covenant, responsibility, “the exile and the stranger,” the need to fight for freedom in every generation – together in a vision that is at once political and spiritual. Israel, ancient and modern, and the United States are the two supreme examples of societies constructed in conscious pursuit of an idea.
There have been four revolutions in the West in modern times: the British and American, and the French and Russian. In Britain and America the source of inspiration was the Hebrew Bible. In France and Russia it was the great alternative to the Bible, namely philosophy. The theorist of the French Revolution was Jean-Jacques Rousseau; of the Russian, Karl Marx. The contrast between them is vivid. Britain and America succeeded in creating a free society, not without civil war, but at least without tyranny and terror. The French and Russian revolutions began with a dream of utopia and ended with a nightmare of bloodshed and the suppression of human rights. The great <i>philosophes</i>, Helvetius, Rousseau, Fichte, Hegel, Saint-Simon, and Marx, created not freedom but its betrayal, what J. L. Talmon called “totalitarian democracy.”
Why did Britain and America succeed where France and Russia failed? The explanation is surely complex but much – perhaps all – turns on how a society answers this question: who is the ultimate sovereign, God or man? The British and Americans gave the first answer, the French and Russian revolutionaries the second. For the British and American architects of liberty, God was the supreme power. All authority was therefore subject to the transcendental demands of the moral law. For the French and Russian ideologists, ultimate value lay in the state or the collective. The failure of the French and Russian revolutions is the most compelling testimony to the fact that when human beings arrogate supreme power to themselves, politics loses its sole secure defense of freedom. Democracy, in and of itself, is not enough. As Tocqueville and John Stuart Mill warned, it merely replaces the tyranny of a minority with the tyranny of the majority. From ancient Athens to the Third Reich and the Soviet Union, no political system that vested absolute power in its rulers, however elected, has resisted corruption. Societies that exile God lead to the eclipse of man. That is why the Exodus narrative remains the canonical text of liberty. It is only when a society acknowledges God that man is protected from his fellow man. As Lord Acton put it in his description of biblical politics:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The inspired men who rose in unfailing succession to prophesy against the usurper and the tyrant, constantly proclaimed that the laws, which were divine, were paramount over sinful rulers, and appealed from the established authorities, from the kings, the priests, and the princes of the people, to the healing forces that slept in the uncorrupted consciences of the masses. Thus the example of the Hebrew nation laid down the parallel lines on which all freedom has been won – the doctrine of national tradition and the doctrine of the higher law; the principle that a constitution grows from a root, by process of development, and not of essential change; and the principle that all political authorities must be tested and reformed according to a code which was not made by man. (<i>The History of Freedom</i>)</span>
The Exodus is the inexhaustible source of inspiration to all those who long for freedom. It taught that right was sovereign over might; that freedom and justice must belong to all, not some; that, under God, all human beings are equal; and that over all earthly powers is the supreme power, the King of kings, who hears the cry of the oppressed and intervenes in history to liberate slaves. It took many centuries for this vision to become the shared property of the liberal democracies of the West; and there is no guarantee that it will remain so. Freedom is a moral achievement, and without a constant effort of education it atrophies and must be fought for again. Nowhere more than on Pesaḥ, though, do we see how the story of one people can become the inspiration of many; how, loyal to its faith across the centuries, the Jewish people became the guardians of a vision through which, ultimately, “all the nations of the earth will be blessed” (Gen. 12:3).

The Omer and the Politics of Torah

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>Teach us rightly to number our days, that we may gain a heart of wisdom.</i> (Ps. 90:12)</small></span>
Some of Judaism’s most profound truths are to be found not in texts but in time, in the Jewish calendar itself. Nowhere is this more so than in the case of <i>Sefirat haOmer</i>, the counting of the forty-nine days from Pesaḥ to Shavuot. “You shall count seven complete weeks from the day following the [Pesaḥ] rest day, when you brought the Omer as a wave offering, count seven full weeks. To the day after the seventh week you shall count fifty days. Then you shall present a meal-offering of new grain to the Lord” (Lev. 23:15–16).
These words contain no obvious political dimension. The counting of the days has to do with the period of the harvest in the land of Israel. Immediately after the first day of Pesaḥ, an offering was made of the first produce of the barley crop. Seven weeks later, on the festival of Shavuot, firstfruits were brought in thanksgiving. The period between was one in which the Israelites were especially mindful of divine blessing and protection. It was God who had “brought forth bread from the earth,” who sent the rain that made the crops grow and protected them from damage and storm. At no other time was the presence of God in nature – “the force that through the green fuse drives the flower” – so apparent. So Israel was to count the days, giving thanks for the blessing of each.
But Jewish tradition rightly saw a quite different meaning to the act of counting days. Among the revolutions brought about by the Torah was the shift of consciousness from nature to history. The Jewish festivals are not only about the seasons of the year. They are also about decisive events in the birth of a people. Pesaḥ is about the Exodus from Egypt. Sukkot represents the forty years of wandering in the wilderness when the Israelites had only temporary homes. There is no explicit connection between Shavuot and a historical event, but tradition understood it as the anniversary of the giving of the Torah at Mount Sinai. This connection gives an entirely new significance to the counting of the Omer.
The forty-nine days mark the period between leaving Egypt and the day the Israelites stood at the foot of the mountain and received their constitution as a “kingdom of priests and a holy nation” (Ex. 19:6). According to Maimonides, the people counted the days in longing as they approached the moment of revelation. For the Jewish mystics, the days represent the gradual purification of the Israelites from the corrosive effects of slavery. For Nahmanides, they mean that Pesaḥ and Shavuot are actually a single extended festival. Just as Sukkot is followed seven days later by Shemini Atzeret, so Pesaḥ is followed seven weeks later by Shavuot. The days of the Omer are the equivalent of Ḥol HaMo’ed, intermediate days of the festival.
What each of these interpretations implies is that Pesaḥ does not stand alone, because the Exodus as an event does not stand alone. Leaving Egypt was only the beginning of freedom. Without a moral code – the commandments heard at Sinai – the Israelites might have gained release from oppression, but they had not yet acquired liberty. The counting of the days expresses the unbreakable connection between Pesaḥ and Shavuot as stages on a single journey from slavery to redemption. Freedom begins with exodus but it reaches its fulfillment in the acceptance of a code of conduct, the Torah, freely offered by God, freely accepted by the people. The counting of the Omer is thus an act of retracing the steps from individual freedom to a free society.
In one of the most influential political essays of the twentieth century, “Two Concepts of Liberty,” the late Sir Isaiah Berlin distinguished between what he called “negative” and “positive” freedom. Negative freedom means freedom <i>from</i> coercion and constraint. It is the ability to do what I want. Positive freedom is freedom <i>to</i>: to act in my own best interests, or in accordance with my “true” self, or some other fundamental purpose. Writing in 1957, in the aftermath of the Holocaust, and when the Soviet Union was in full force, Berlin was concerned to argue the case for liberty against totalitarianism. He knew as well as anyone that even the most brutal regime was capable of arguing that it alone gave people true freedom. That was because Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Karl Marx, two prophets of totalitarianism, both claimed to have finally understood the meaning of liberty. For Rousseau, freedom meant merging your individual will with the will of society as a whole. For Marx it meant collective ownership of capital so that the rich could no longer oppress the poor. Marx spoke of freeing the workers from their chains, Rousseau of “forcing men to be free.” Berlin was rightly concerned with the crimes committed in the name of liberty and therefore argued in favor of negative freedom alone. A society should leave people as free as possible to do what they want. Anything else – any form of positive freedom – opened the doors to tyranny.
Berlin’s analysis is impressive but wrong. Few faiths have reflected as deeply on the meaning of freedom as Judaism. Pesaḥ is <i>zeman ḥeruteinu</i>, the “festival of freedom.” The biblical account of the Exodus includes a declaration on the part of God that uses four different words to describe freedom (one reason for the four cups of wine at the seder service): “I am the Lord, and I will <i>bring you out</i> from under the yoke of the Egyptians and <i>deliver</i> you from their slavery; I will <i>redeem</i> you with an outstretched arm and with mighty judgment. I will <i>take</i> you to Me as a nation” (Ex. 6:6). Clearly, for the Torah, freedom is a process, a complex idea that cannot be reduced to simple formulae.
To understand the biblical approach to freedom we have to remember that the Torah describes two disasters, each of which symbolizes a world gone wrong. The second is slavery in Egypt. The first is the Flood. The second represents totalitarianism. The first was the result not of too oppressive an order, but of the opposite: lawlessness, chaos, violence, the absence of restraints, what Hobbes called the war of “all against all.” If freedom is the ability to do what we wish, then it means freedom for the violent against the peaceful, the aggressive against the passive, the exploitative against the trusting. It means freedom for the strong but not the weak, the cruel but not the kind, the rich but not the poor. That is why the theorists of liberty in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries did not call it freedom at all. They called it “license.” Negative freedom in Berlin’s sense cannot be sufficient for a just and gracious society. It brings individual but not collective liberty. It favors some but not all.
That is what makes the Torah’s approach to freedom so rich and subtle. There is a biblical word for negative freedom, namely <i>ḥofesh</i>. That is what a person receives when he or she is released from slavery. They now no longer have someone ordering them to do this or that. They have become their own masters. That, for the Torah, is a precondition of human dignity. As we saw in an earlier chapter, many institutions of Judaism – from Shabbat to the release of slaves and cancellation of debts in the seventh year and the return of ancestral land in the fiftieth – are about this kind of freedom, about not being enslaved or indebted to someone else. When the poet Naftali Herz Imber sat down to compose <i>HaTikva</i>, the national anthem of the State of Israel, he used this word. He spoke of the Jewish hope to be <i>am ḥofshi be’artzeinu</i>, “a free people in our own land.” <i>Ḥofesh</i> means freedom as personal independence.
But independence is only half of the human situation. The first time the Torah uses the words <i>lo tov</i>, “not good,” it is to make this point: “It is not good for man to be alone” (Gen. 2:18). Human beings cannot survive in isolation. We are, said Aristotle, “political animals,” or as Maimonides put it, more Jewishly, we are “social animals.” We need the assistance of others for our most basic requirements of food, shelter, and defense. The very process of procreation needs partnership. We want to be independent, but we are also and inescapably interdependent. From this flows the whole drama and pathos of the human situation. Hegel once put the problem simply by asking, what do porcupines do in the winter? If they stay apart, they freeze. If they come too close, they injure one another. The art is to find the right balance between closeness and distance. So it is with us.
We need one another to survive. But the very act of forming a partnership with someone else creates potential conflict. I want this; you want that. Whose will is to prevail? If mine, then you suffer. If yours, then I suffer. The human condition is fraught with the tension of clashing interests, desires, passions, and pursuits. It happens within marriages, families, communities, societies, and between nations, and it leads to violence and sometimes war. The problem of freedom is never as simple as its theorists would like it to be.
The classic solution – it has appeared in almost infinite forms since the birth of civilization – is to use force, centralized in the form of the state. This is the simplest way of preventing one person from robbing or injuring another. There are laws, and they are enforced. The significant questions then become: who is the state, and how intrusive is it? The first question preoccupied the ancient Greeks, who distinguished between forms of government (monarchy, oligarchy, democracy). The second concerned figures like John Stuart Mill, who argued that the state should never interfere with people’s lives unless they are directly harming others. Isaiah Berlin belongs to this second tradition.
One of the most original insights of the Hebrew Bible, however, is that force is not the only or even the best way of getting people to cooperate. There is an alternative. Imagine that you and I, different in our interests and strengths, realize that we will both gain if we work together. Neither of us wants to use force. That would be an assault on the other’s integrity. But neither of us wants to risk betrayal by the other. The alternative to the use of force is <i>trust</i>. Trust is created by the use of language. We talk, communicate, share our dreams; we begin to understand one another and realize that we can work together. We can then go further and make a promise to one another. We can enter into a mutual pledge. This is a highly specialized use of language known as <i>performative utterance</i>. It means the use of words to create facts – in this case, mutually binding obligations. What then has to happen for trust to be effective is that I must <i>keep</i> my word, and you, yours. The Torah has a special word for a mutual pledge of this kind. It calls it a <i>brit</i>, a covenant.
The most basic form of covenant is a marriage. In marriage two people agree to join their destinies to one another, to cherish, support, and protect each other, so that neither is condemned to face an uncertain future alone. Marriage is a remarkable institution because, to the extent that it is honored, it shows that two people, each respecting the integrity of the other, can nonetheless create a collaborative partnership that relies for its strength not on the use of force but on love, loyalty, fidelity, the willingness to undertake responsibilities and keep to them, and the readiness to consider another person’s interests as sacred as one’s own. Not by accident is the Book of Genesis largely about families and marriage: Adam and Eve, Noah and his household, Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob, Rachel, and Leah. Knowing the Bible as well as we do, we rarely if ever stop to consider how strange this is. But it is strange to the point of being unique. Every other literature until modern times (the times, say, of Jane Austen) is about epic heroes, gods or demigods, figures of legendary strength and power. The stunning originality of the Book of Genesis is that its heroes and heroines are ordinary people in ordinary situations, made extraordinary not by their power but by their loyalty to one another and to God.
In moving from Genesis to Exodus the Torah takes the idea further in a radical leap of the imagination. What if covenant might be the basis not only of marriage but of a society as a whole? What if the Israelites, already forged as a people in the crucible of suffering, undertook a pledge with one another and with God, to respect each other’s freedom, to value someone else’s property and safety with the same vigilance that I do my own, and to see society as an extended family, so that I owe to others the same duty of concern and care that I owe my brothers and sisters? Such a society would be held together not by the use of force – not by rulers, armies, police, and courts – but by <i>the power of words</i> to bind us to one another in open-ended and mutual commitment. These words would, of necessity, be <i>sacred</i>, which is to say, commanding, obligating, binding, to be taken with the same ultimate seriousness as life itself.
That is what happens to the Israelites at Mount Sinai. Accepting only God, and no human power, as their sovereign, they pledge themselves to one another by agreeing to a code of duties to each other and to God. They become the first – and until the birth of the United States the only – nation to be formed by a covenant, whose written constitution was the Torah, and whose force was none other than the word undertaken and honored as a matter of reciprocal loyalty and binding commitment. Thus Judaism became the first religion of the <i>word</i>, whose most sacred object is a book, and whose ultimate reality is God, who enters into a covenant with a people (a covenant seen by the prophets as a form of marriage), thus turning love into law and law into love.
What an extraordinary idea of freedom this is. It depends, for its success, not on power, but on moral obligation. Needless to say, this places a greater burden on the educated conscience than any other political system, and therefore requires unique institutions. It needs constant education. The people must know the law; they must hand it on to their children; they must speak of it constantly until it becomes part of their innermost being. It needs regular rehearsal – dramatic enactments like the festivals, through which Israel reminds itself of who it is and how it came to be. But the gain is immense. It means that Israel, if it is loyal to the covenant, will experience a freedom greater than any other people in ancient or even modern times. They will keep the law, not because of fear of arrest, trial, and punishment, but because of their love of God, their concern for their neighbors, and their shared sense of past and future. Only once we understand this can we appreciate the strangest fact of all in Jewish history – that without sovereignty and a land, without police or an army, without any of the normal accoutrements of nationhood, the Jewish people kept Jewish law voluntarily in exile for two thousand years. There is nothing else remotely like this in history.
Judaism has a special word for this unique form of freedom. It is <i>ḥerut</i>. In <i>Ethics of the Fathers</i>, the sages explained it by way of a brilliant play on words. Noting the similarity between <i>ḥerut</i> and <i>ḥarut</i>, “engraved,” they reread the biblical text in which Moses descended from Mount Sinai, holding in his hands the two tablets of stone containing the law of God. The verse reads, “The tablets were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, <i>engraved</i> on the tablets” (Ex. 32:16). The rabbis said, “Read not <i>ḥarut</i> but <i>ḥerut</i> [not <i>engraved</i> but <i>freedom</i>], for the only person who is truly free is one who occupies himself with Torah study” (Mishna <i>Avot</i> 6:2). What they meant was that if the law is engraved on the hearts of its citizens, it does not need to be enforced by police. True freedom – <i>ḥerut</i> – is the ability to control oneself without having to be controlled by others, accepting voluntarily the moral restraints without which liberty becomes license and society itself a battleground of warring instincts and desires.
That, therefore, is the journey the counting of the Omer represents: from <i>ḥofesh</i>, the negative freedom of Pesaḥ and the release from slavery, to <i>ḥerut</i>, the substantive freedom of the covenant and the revelation at Mount Sinai. Freedom means more than losing your chains. It involves developing the capacity to think, feel, and act for the benefit of others. That needs families, schools, places of worship, conversations between the generations, rituals, prayers, and the telling of stories. It needs “habits of the heart,” and it takes time – which is why, between Pesaḥ and Shavuot, we become conscious of time by counting days. Pesaḥ is the beginning of the journey, not the end.
Covenantal politics stand as the great alternative to three other systems: hierarchical, organic, and contractual. Hierarchical politics are built on divisions of class or caste. Organic politics, of which nationalism and fascism are examples, are predicated on the idea that the individual has meaning only as part of the whole. Contractual politics take the opposite view, that the individual is supreme, and that politics is the pursuit of self-interest. I gain by handing over some of my powers to a government that, by securing the rule of law, the defense of the realm, and providing certain services, makes me better off than I would be otherwise.
Covenantal systems are unique in placing ethics at the heart of society. They place a high value on loyalty and trust. They cherish the family as the birthplace of virtue. They speak about respect for parents and responsibility to children. They emphasize community, the bonds of belonging, voluntary work, and service. They assume no conflict between responsibility for oneself and responsibility for others (Hillel’s “If I am not for myself, who will be for me? And if I am only for myself, what am I?”). They assume, not as a fact but as a value to be constantly worked for, the equal worth of all, especially the dependent and vulnerable. And they depend on belief in a set of ethical principles beyond the autonomous will. In a covenantal society, “I ought” does not mean “I want.” Covenantal societies are based not on abstract principles but on concrete historical memories. They are about <i>this people</i> and how it came to be, and what led its founders to make this particular pledge in pursuit of that vision, these ideals. Covenants create societies, not states. A covenant is, in this sense, prepolitical rather than political. The children of Israel did not become a state until they chose a king in the days of Samuel. Until then Israel had been a loose collection of tribes. But it became a society – a republic of faith under the sovereignty of God – at Mount Sinai, several centuries before.
As I intimated in the previous chapter, the greatest covenantal society in modern times has been the United States. The early colonies were formed by covenant. Presidential inaugurals regularly invoke both the word and the idea. America’s definitive covenantal document is the Declaration of Independence (1776), constructed eleven years before its constitution. What John Schaar writes about the political beliefs of Abraham Lincoln applies to America as a whole:
<span class="poetry indentAll">We are a nation formed by a covenant, by dedication to a set of principles and by an exchange of promises to uphold and advance certain commitments among ourselves and throughout the world. Those principles and commitments are the core of American identity, the soul of the body politic. They make the American nation unique, and uniquely valuable, among and to the other nations. But the other side of the conception contains a warning very like the warnings spoken by the prophets to Israel: if we fail in our promises to each other, and lose the principles of the covenant, then we lose everything, for they are we. (<i>Legitimacy and the Modern State</i>)</span>
At the heart of the politics of the Hebrew Bible is the understanding, achieved through painful experience of exile and exodus, that liberty depends on a shared moral code, and on the education of new generations to internalize its values. Much of the Bible is a commentary on the historic difficulties faced by the Israelites as they tried, and often failed, to realize the social vision of the covenant. A period of disorder in the days of the judges (“In those days there was no king in Israel; each person did what was right in his own eyes” [Judges 21:25]) was followed by a succession of sometimes corrupt and tyrannical kings. The ideal of the Torah – lofty but not utopian – is of limited government accompanied by personal self-government, the law of the state taking second place to the law of the heart. Only a self-disciplined people will be able to sustain for long the political framework of liberty. For without moral restraint, society is condemned to oscillate between anarchy and oppression, too little government and too much, and sometimes both at once.
One of the ironies of the postmodern West is that the triumph of freedom over totalitarian regimes has gone hand in hand with an erosion of the moral bases of freedom. Morality has been relativized into self-fulfillment. Responsibilities have taken second place to rights. The very idea of objective standards of right and wrong has become suspect. If history teaches any lesson at all, it is that this, if unchecked, is a prelude to disaster. The man who said so best was an unlikely figure, Bertrand Russell. Russell, hardly a religious man, thought that the two great ages of mankind were to be found in ancient Greece and Renaissance Italy. But he was honest enough to admit that the very features that made them great contained the seeds of their own demise:
<span class="poetry indentAll">What had happened in the great age of Greece happened again in Renaissance Italy: traditional moral restraints disappeared, because they were seen to be associated with superstition; the liberation from fetters made individuals energetic and creative, producing a rare fluorescence of genius; but the anarchy and treachery which inevitably resulted from the decay of morals made Italians collectively impotent, and they fell, like the Greeks, under the domination of nations less civilized than themselves but not so destitute of social cohesion. (<i>History of Western Philosophy</i>)</span>
To win freedom is one thing; to sustain it, another. Judaism taught this truth in the simplest of ways, by counting the days between Pesaḥ and Shavuot, exodus and revelation. Freedom begins with the defeat of tyranny, but it is preserved by a code of virtue – the Torah, Israel’s “constitution of liberty” – which lies beyond the realm of democratic vote, individual preference, or passing fashion. Judaism’s early sages asked, “Who is strong?” (Mishna<i> Avot</i> 4:1) They answered: not one who is strong enough to defeat his opponents, but one who is strong enough to practice self-restraint. Moral virtue needs a different and more difficult strength than military courage. That is what we learn on the journey from Pesaḥ and Shavuot, from individual to covenantal freedom.

Time as a Narrative of Hope

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>The unappeased memory of a future still to be fulfilled.</i>(Harold Fisch, <i>A Remembered Future</i>)</small></span>
In his monumental work<i> The Wealth and Poverty of Nations</i>, Harvard economic historian David Landes asks a fascinating question. China in the Middle Ages was more advanced than Europe. Long before the West, it had invented paper, printing, gunpowder, the compass, and porcelain. By the eleventh century it had developed blast furnaces, fueled by coal and coke, for smelting iron. By the twelfth it had already produced a water-driven machine for spinning hemp. In many fields it was centuries ahead. Yet the Industrial Revolution took place not in China, but in Europe. Why was it that in China, technological progress moved so far but no further?
There are multiple explanations, but one, suggests Landes, is that Europe had something China lacked, namely the Western sense of time. The Chinese did not see time as the arena of change; the Europeans did. To create a revolution, first you have to be able to imagine it. You need the ideas that make historical transformation possible and desirable. What Europe possessed, and what proved critical to its economic and political success, was a Judeo-Christian concept of time.
We tend to take time for granted. It is, we assume, the same for everyone everywhere – one of the few things that is. There are sixty minutes in an hour, twenty-four hours in a day, seven days in a week, regardless of how rich or poor we are, or where we live on the surface of the world. One of the few differences between ourselves and our ancestors is that we can measure it more accurately, using oscillating quartz crystals instead of the sundials and water clocks, hourglasses and calibrated candles of the ancient world. But time is not simply something we measure. It is also something to which we bring some of our deepest assumptions about the nature of reality and mankind’s place in the universe. The understanding of time differs from culture to culture and from age to age. Historians are generally agreed that with the Hebrew Bible a quite new concept of time appeared. It is not too much to say – many scholars have – that this was one of Judaism’s greatest contributions to the West.
The most obvious sense of time is given by nature. That is how the ancients thought, and many moderns also. Any understanding of time on the basis of nature is bound to be cyclical. Things change, but they come back to their starting point. The planets revolve in their courses. The climate passes through its seasons: spring, summer, autumn, winter. Life has its own rhythms: birth, growth, decline, death, and rebirth. That is how time appears to those for whom nature, myth, and/or science are the primary realities. Time, like the slow turning of a wheel, describes a circle, periodically returning to where it began. That which was will be again. Nothing ultimately changes.
That was time in the world of myth. In modernity, it was given its most famous expression by Nietzsche. The sum total of energy in the universe, he argued, is finite. But time is infinite. Therefore any possible configuration of elements has already happened and will happen again in the future. The Hebrew Bible itself contains a book dedicated to this theme – the strange work called <i>Kohelet</i>, Ecclesiastes. “What has been will be again, what has been done will be done again; there is nothing new under the sun” (1:9). <i>Kohelet</i> draws the inevitable conclusion: “Meaningless, meaningless, everything is meaningless” (1:2).
It is difficult to grasp the immensity of the leap that occurred when first Abraham, then Moses and the Israelites, and later the prophets began to see time differently. It was one of the greatest revolutions in the history of ideas, and it has still not been made by all cultures. It came when the religious visionaries of Israel heard God in history instead of seeing God in nature. If God transcends nature, then He is free. Unlike the gods of the ancient world, He is not bound by the laws of nature. God acts, not because He must, but because He wills and chooses.
The fateful corollary is that, having been made in God’s image, we too are free. Though we are part of nature – we have bodies, we feel hunger and cold, we age and die – there is something within us that is not part of nature, namely self-consciousness, the ability to stand back from our immediate situation and pass judgment on it. The Greeks called this “the soul.” The second chapter of Genesis calls it “the breath of God” (v. 7). The combination of language and self-consciousness means that human beings have a sense of time to be found nowhere else in creation. All animals have a sense of cyclical time hardwired into their brains. Some migrate; others hibernate at particular points in the year. What is unique to humans is the sense of a <i>distant</i> past and future: “there was” and “there will be.” It took a radical imaginative leap to see that if we are free, not wholly determined by nature, the world of “there will be” might be altogether different from that of “there was.”
Human beings can choose. They can learn by error and experience and act differently next time. The future, therefore, is not destined to be like the past. History is not an endless series of eternal recurrences or <i>déjà vus</i>. Instead it is like a journey, with a starting point and a destination, or like a book with a beginning and middle and distantly glimpsed end. This is the sense of time that makes its appearance in the Hebrew Bible. Until Christianity borrowed it from Judaism, it existed nowhere else. The Greek writer Herodotus, for example, is widely known as “the father of history,” but he had no thought of history as an overarching narrative. It was simply the record of events. History, for him, was interesting simply because it happened and because it contained exemplary cases of courage and folly, success and failure, but it added up to no larger pattern. Jews thought otherwise.
It began with Abraham’s journey from Ur. But the decisive event was the Exodus. In Egypt, the Israelites first sensed the intervention of God in history on a massive scale. The Egypt of the pharaohs was the oldest, most stable and seemingly impregnable of the empires of the ancient world. It embodied timelessness. With the solitary exception of the Hyksos invasion three centuries before, Egypt was the supreme example of civilization-as-order, power immune to change. The seasons, life and death, pharaohs themselves came and went, but the social structure, like Egypt’s monumental buildings, defied time.
The overthrowing of this structure and the unprecedented release of a whole nation from slavery showed that societies are <i>not</i> immutable. They belong not to nature but to culture. They are made by men and women; therefore they can be unmade and remade by men and women. Injustice, oppression, dominance, exploitation, the enslavement of the weak by the strong, are not written into the constitution of the universe, for beyond them is the voice of the transcendent God, the “ought” beyond the “is,” summoning us to shape a more gracious and humane world. That is where the Israelites’ journey began. To those who hear the voice, it continues still.
The historian Eric Voegelin suggests that it was not by accident that God chose the desert to reveal the plan of a new kind of society: “When the world has become Desert, man is at last in the solitude in which he can hear thunderingly the voice of the spirit” (<i>Israel and Revelation</i>). Voegelin does not make the verbal connection between the Hebrew terms for “desert,” <i>midbar</i>, and “word,” <i>davar</i> (both are derived from the root D-B-R); but it is a significant one. The desert is the place of human silence in which the divine word can be sensed in its fullness and power. “What emerged from the alembic of the Desert,” he concludes, “was not a people like the Egyptians or Babylonians, the Canaanites or Philistines, the Hittites or Arameans, but a new genus of society, set off from the civilizations of the age by the divine choice. It was a people that moved on the historical scene while living toward a goal beyond history.”
For the first time an abyss opened up between the past and the future, Egypt and the Promised Land. The journey through space, across the wilderness, came to symbolize a journey through time, whose destination is something new, unprecedented, a tomorrow radically unlike yesterday. In this context we begin to understand the Israelites’ constant complaints and their expressed desire, on several occasions, to go back to Egypt. The psychologist Erich Fromm coined the phrase “fear of freedom,” and when the Israelites first experienced it, it must have been fearful indeed – the loss of everything secure, predictable, unchanging, and in its place only uncertainty and a destination always beyond the horizon. An open future – the essential negation of cyclical time – can be terrifying. Only God’s promise, and the Israelites’ trust in that promise, made it bearable. This concept of time makes the Hebrew word <i>emuna</i>, usually translated as “faith,” utterly distinctive in the religious language of mankind. It does not mean certainty; it means, to the contrary, <i>the courage to live with uncertainty</i>, knowing that the future is radically unpredictable, but that it can be faced without fear because we are not alone. God and His word are with us.
Voegelin is particularly acute when he says that Israel was “a people that moved on the historical scene while living toward a goal beyond history.” The destination of the Jewish journey was much more than a place, Canaan, the land “flowing with milk and honey.” It was an ideal future, the “time to come,” an era of justice and peace. Moses spoke of it in his majestic closing speeches that we know as the Book of Deuteronomy. Isaiah foresaw it in the surpassing visions that form the closing chapters of the book that bears his name. Almost all the prophets have their own formulations. Joel speaks of a day in which God will “pour out My spirit on all people. Your sons and daughters will prophesy, your old men will dream dreams, your young men will see visions” (3:1). Jeremiah envisions a future in which, in God’s words, “I will put My law in their minds and write it on their hearts…. No longer will a man teach his neighbor, or a man his brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord,’ because they will all know Me, from the least of them to the greatest” (31:32–33). Eventually it became known as the messianic age.
No concept has been more debated, contested, and fraught with controversy than the messianic age. It led, in Jewish history, to a series of false messiahs, each of whom left disruption in his wake. In more modern times it created a deep rift between Zionists and their opponents, between those who believed that redemption could or should be initiated by man and those who argued that, to the contrary, it could be brought only by God, so any attempt to hasten the end by human intervention was heresy. If not for the Holocaust, that debate might still divide the Jewish world. Gershom Scholem argued on secular grounds that the messianic idea had caused more harm than good. It led, he said, to “<i>a life lived in deferment</i>, in which nothing can be done definitively, nothing can be irrevocably accomplished” (“The Messianic Idea in Judaism”). Because, for centuries, Jews were suspended between a remote miraculous past (the biblical era) and an equally remote miraculous future (the messianic age), the present was systematically devalued; suspended animation.
The concept of messianic time <i>is</i> dangerous, because it can lead to two possibilities: a refusal to act in the present, because all redemption is in the hands of God, or, to the contrary, a readiness to act recklessly in the present, because redemption is at hand and God will ensure success. The very existence of Israel depends on the ability to keep these two tendencies in check. My own interpretation of the messianic idea, however, is that it stands in relation to Jewish history as the stars did to ancient navigation. As Kenneth Minogue notes, “when you steer by a star you don’t aim to arrive there” (<i>Politics</i>). The perfect world – the world we rehearse every Shabbat – is beyond history; but history itself is the attempt, never wholly successful, but marked nonetheless by real and significant advance, to come ever closer to that ideal. God alone can bring about a world of perfect justice, but we are not wrong to keep that vision constantly before us as we seek to create a society less random and cruel than those in the past.
The messianic idea gave Jewish sensibility its unique restlessness, its striving, its principled orientation to the future, unlike almost every other civilization known to mankind, whose golden age is in the distant, usually mythical past. Moses spent his life traveling toward a land he was not allowed to enter. “It is not for you to complete the task,” said Rabbi Tarfon, “but neither are you free to stand aside from it” (Mishna <i>Avot</i> 2:16). Jewish time sees us as travelers on the road to a destination not yet reached; wayfarers on a journey begun by our ancestors, to be continued by our children. At best we see the promised age as Moses saw the land of Israel at the end of his life – distantly, as from a mountaintop. But that is enough. All of history tells us that we are not wrong to travel, to take risks, to see poverty, hunger, disease, and injustice as things we are called on to fight, not accept. Not all of mankind’s dreams are destined, as they were for the Greek dramatists, to end in tragedy. With God’s help, and that of other people with whom we are bound in covenant, we can change the world.
Thomas Cahill gives us a sense of the impact of this idea on the imagination of the West:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The Jews gave us the Outside and the Inside – our outlook and our inner life. We can hardly get up in the morning or cross the street without being Jewish. We dream Jewish dreams and hope Jewish hopes. Most of our best words, in fact – <i>new, adventure, surprise; unique, individual, person, vocation; time, history, future; freedom, progress, spirit; faith, hope, justice</i> – are the gifts of the Jews. (<i>Gifts of the Jews</i>)</span>
The name usually given by historians to this new concept is linear (as opposed to “cyclical”) time. This, though, is a profound mistake. Linear time is, in fact, the quite different idea that took shape between the seventeenth and twentieth centuries when the religious view of time, born in the Hebrew Bible and reintroduced into the West by the Puritans, was secularized. Now it was no longer God, or the Bible, or faith that would drive history forward, but reason and experimentation. Through science, humanity would conquer ignorance. Through reason, it would banish prejudice. Through trade it would develop the wealth of nations. Through technology, it would dominate nature. That was the view shared by thinkers as diverse as Saint-Simon, Comte, Hegel, and Marx, economists like Adam Smith, biologists like Darwin, and the historians and anthropologists of the nineteenth century. Condorcet put it as well as any when he wrote, “Nature has set no term to the perfection of our human faculties; that the perfectibility of man is truly indefinite, and that the progress of this perfectibility, from now onwards independent of any power that might wish to halt it, has no other limit than the duration of the globe on which nature has cast us” (<i>Picture of the Progress of the Human Mind</i>).
This is not biblical time but a translation of it into a quite different frame of reference. Instead of seeing history as an interactive drama between heaven and earth, God’s word and mankind’s response, it sees it as an arena dominated by man alone. In place of ethics it enthrones science; instead of a journey full of risk, it sees history as continuous, unbroken advance; it deletes the word “redemption” and replaces it with the word “progress.”
These were powerful ideas, and for almost three centuries they were effective. They led to the development of science, improvements in medicine, the Industrial Revolution, the spread of democracy, and the growth of tolerance as an ideal. By now, though, we know their limitations. The Enlightenment failed to prevent the Holocaust. Technology has given us the power to destroy life on earth. The growth of consumption threatens the ecological system whose air we breathe. We have moved from modernity to post-modernity, meaning that we have lost confidence in the upward march of time. As Robert Bellah notes, “Progress, modernity’s master idea, seems less compelling when it appears that it may be progress into the abyss” (<i>Habits of the Heart</i>).
Jewish time is not linear but something more profound. I call it <i>covenantal time</i>. This is time not as continuous advance, but as a narrative with a beginning and a distant end, in whose midst we are and whose twists and turns continue to surprise us. The terms of the drama are set. There are two characters, God and mankind. There are continuing themes: exile and redemption, wanderings in the wilderness, backslidings and lapses, atonement and forgiveness, returns and rededications, epiphanies and moments when man looks for God and fails to find Him. Nothing in this narrative is as simple as linear time. There is no guarantee of progress. There are constant digressions, false turns, wanderings in the wilderness. There is no “historical inevitability” – that modern idea which, as Karl Popper and Isaiah Berlin remind us, has been the source of so much brutality and bloodshed in the modern world (“progress,” like every other false god, has called forth the blood of human sacrifice in abundance). Above all, covenantal time is conscious of <i>limits</i> in our dealings with nature and our fellow men. The prophets of linear time have always been convinced that there are no limits: that nature is infinitely bountiful, economic growth open-ended, and humanity – through revolution, or social engineering, or eugenics, or selective cloning – ultimately perfectible. Whenever mankind loses a sense of limits, disaster follows as surely as does night, day.
The deepest difference between linear and covenantal time is that whereas the first gives rise to <i>optimism</i>, the latter leads to <i>hope</i>. These two concepts, often confused, are in fact utterly different. Optimism is the belief that things will get better. Hope is the belief that, together, we can make things better. Optimism is a passive virtue, hope an active one. It takes no courage – only a certain naivety – to be an optimist. It takes great courage to sustain hope. No Jew – knowing what we do of the past, of hatred, bloodshed, persecution in the name of God, suppression of human rights in the name of freedom – can be an optimist. But Jews have never given up hope. “Even youths grow tired and weary, and young men stumble and fall,” says Isaiah, “but those who hope in the Lord will renew their strength” (40:30). “Hold back your voice from weeping,” urges Jeremiah, “there is hope for your future” (31:15). To be a prophet is to find a vestige of hope in the wreckage of despair. Jewish time – this is the secret of the influence of the Pesaḥ story on the Western imagination – is the supreme narrative of hope.
It is worth adding, because I have not seen it said, that this is why the British and American revolutions succeeded while the French and Russian revolutions failed. There is a fundamental difference between philosophy, the gift of the Greeks to Western civilization, and the Hebrew Bible, the gift of Israel. Philosophy (that “series of footnotes to Plato,” as Alfred North Whitehead called it) sees <i>truth as system</i>. The Bible sees <i>truth as story</i>. Philosophical systems are essentially timeless. They speak either of truth as eternal, or (in the case of Hegel and Marx) of history as inexorable, predetermined. In Judaism, by contrast, time is of the essence, which is why its vision can be told only in the form of narrative (first this, then that; “it came to pass after these things”; chronological rather than logical sequence). Two things only stand outside of time: the beginning of days (Eden) and the end (the messianic age). Between them lies the long journey to redemption.
More than any other system, the Hebrew Bible teaches that it takes time to realize moral ideals. Pesaḥ, 3,300 years ago, was the definitive protest against slavery, yet the West did not abolish slavery until the nineteenth century, and in America, only at the cost of civil war. The opening chapter of the Torah, with its statement that man is “the image of God,” was the first articulation of the sanctity of the individual and thus of human rights. It was not until 1948 that the United Nations issued its Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Isaiah and his younger contemporary Micah were the first to envision peace as an ideal. Humanity has not reached it yet. Nor has any society yet realized the vision of a world without hierarchy and manipulation, experienced by Jews one day in seven, every Shabbat. The messianic age is not now. There is still a way to go.
Because of its systemic failure to understand time, philosophy (an immense gift to civilization, and still our best way of thinking about thinking) has always been, and will always be, disastrous when applied to the political realm, which is what happened in revolutionary France and communist Russia. Philosophy as political ideology constantly holds forth the promise of a shortcut to utopia – and there is no shortcut. It took forty years for the Israelites to get from Egypt to the banks of the Jordan, a journey that should have taken days. That, says Maimonides, was no accident. A generation born in slavery was not ready for the responsibilities of freedom. Hope is the ability to combine aspiration with patience; to be undeterred by setbacks and delays; to have a sense of the time it takes to effect change in the human heart; never to forget the destination even in the midst of exile and disaster. The politics of progress, from Plato to Marx (what J. L. Talmon calls “secular messianism”), is always impatient, because it lacks more than a superficial understanding of time. Judaism has never ceased to wrestle with time (“I will not let you go until you bless me,” said Jacob to the angel [Gen. 32:26], as Jews have always said of time and fate). Because of this it yields a different kind of aspiration, one that I call <i>the politics of hope</i>.
Jews are a tiny people, less than a quarter of a percent of the population of the world. They always were. (“Not because you had greater numbers than all the other nations did God embrace you and choose you,” said Moses at the end of his life. “You are among the smallest of all the nations” [Deut. 7:7]). Because of this, they have often found it difficult to understand their place in the totality of mankind. Sometimes they have thought too little of themselves (the verdict of Moses’ spies comes to mind: they are giants, we are grasshoppers). Other times they have thought too much (“When I felt secure,” says David in Psalm 30, “I said, ‘I shall never be shaken’” [v. 7]). Which was it: the pariah people or the chosen people? Caught between these extremes, and despite their almost endless preoccupation with their own identity, they found it hard to arrive at a realistic estimate of their role among the nations. As we saw in the chapter on anti-Semitism, that same difficulty has existed when other nations tried to evaluate Jews and Judaism. They also found themselves caught between contemptuous dismissal and an exaggerated view of Jewish power, sometimes both at once.
My own view, arrived at after long reflection, is that Jews have been called on to bear witness – in their faith, history, and way of life – to certain fundamental truths of the human condition: that we are free, and thus responsible, and therefore charged with becoming God’s partners in the work of redemption; that life is sacred and therefore human rights are nonnegotiable; that civilizations become invulnerable only when they care for the vulnerable; that freedom depends on education and the emotional intelligence that comes from strong families and communities held together by the bonds of shared memory and responsibility; and that all achievement in the social realm takes time and can be sustained only by a narrative of hope.
These are not the only truths of the human situation, and therefore Judaism does not hold a monopoly on wisdom (“If they tell you there is wisdom among the nations, believe it,” said the rabbis [<i>Lamentations Raba</i> 2:13]; they even composed a special blessing on seeing a non-Jewish sage). Not all truths are compatible. That is why there can be no ultimate global harmony within history (= unredeemed, nonmessianic time). For principled reasons, for example, Jews did not develop the visual arts (they believed in a God who could be heard, not seen). The Greeks did. Nor did Jews cultivate the forms of inner peace practiced by some Oriental mysticisms, for this involves a sense of the unreality of pain and suffering, which Judaism, with its striving for this-worldly justice, cannot accept. For that reason Judaism has a dual concept of peace: the end-of-days peace envisioned by the prophets, and the more modest here-and-now peace articulated by the sages in their concept of <i>darkhei shalom</i>, a set of rules for friendly coexistence with those with whom you disagree.
Judaism, as I have argued, teaches the <i>dignity of difference</i>: the diversity of the created world and the irreducible multiplicity of human attempts to express the infinite. In such a world, the most important process is <i>conversation</i> – a willingness to speak and listen to others, knowing that you have something unique to teach, but others do also (“Who is wise? asked Ben Zoma, and answered: One who learns from everyone” [<i>Pirkei</i> <i>Avot</i> 4:1]). Because of their unique experience of the Exodus, Jews learned more than most the importance of loving the stranger, of being true to one’s own faith while being a blessing to others, of contributing to the human project as a whole without making the mistake that we are all the same. Judaism is the great countervoice in the conversation of mankind.
I have tried to show how the modern history of the West – especially Britain in the seventeenth century, and America from then till now – was shaped by the new encounter with the Hebrew Bible, brought about by the Reformation and the invention of printing. Jews themselves suffered a more tempestuous exposure to modernity, which began with the promise of the Enlightenment and ended in the Holocaust and the transfer of Jewish hopes to a reborn Israel. Anti-Semitism has not ended, but the Jewish situation has been transformed. For the first time in two thousand years, the Jewish people has a home, a place where it can construct a macrosociety on the basis of Judaic principle (not a theocratic state: that is something altogether different). For the first time ever, outside Israel, Jews have the chance of making a substantive contribution to the shaping of the liberal, pluralist democracies of the West. The Pesaḥ story is therefore more salient than ever: no longer a mere hope but a real and present challenge.
It is fair to say that we have not yet risen to that challenge. The Jewish religious imagination, still suffering the effects of trauma and dislocation, has not yet recovered its poise, scope, intellectual breadth, or prophetic depth. In the past half-century it has produced too few prophets – men and women sufficiently gifted in the arts of listening to time and eternity, the particularity of Jewish existence and the universality of human concern, to hear in God’s word for all time the specific cadences of the word for <i>this</i> time. Yet this too will come, and I have tried in these chapters to signal the territory from which it will come and the themes it will embrace. The Pesaḥ story influenced not only Jews but non-Jews, as Moses foresaw – knowing as he did that the God who rescued Israel from Egypt is the God not of Israel only, but of the world, and therefore that the Exodus contains a message not only for Jews, but for all who seek, on this troubled planet, to construct a society that is a worthy dwelling place for God, whose image we are.

The Sages in Benei Brak

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>Once, Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Yehoshua and Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria and Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Tarfon reclined [for the seder] in Benei Brak. And they told of the exodus from Egypt all that night; until their students came in and said, “Teachers – the time for saying the</i> Shema<i> of the morning has come.”</i> (Haggada)</small></span>
The story of the five sages in Benei Brak who spent the night discussing the Exodus, and only stopped when their disciples came to tell them that it was morning, has long intrigued commentators and scholars. What were they talking about?
One suggestion, made by the late Cecil Roth among others, has attracted considerable interest, namely that they were discussing the Bar Kokhba rebellion against the Romans. Benei Brak was the home of Rabbi Akiva, who was known to be a supporter of Bar Kokhba, and who eventually went to a martyr’s death in the course of the revolt.
It is a fascinating suggestion, but there is no evidence for it. There is no intimation in the text that this was the subject of their conversation. Nor was it likely that the sages would have turned their attention from the religious duty of the night – telling the story of the going out from Egypt – to discuss contemporary politics.
The Bar Kokhba rebellion was a tragic error. It led to one of the greatest-ever devastations of Jewish life. The Roman historian Dio estimates that 580,000 Jews died in the fighting, “and countless numbers by starvation, fire, and the sword.” Some 985 towns were destroyed and the countryside was laid waste. Jerusalem was razed to the ground and rebuilt as Aelia Capitolina, a Roman city, which Jews were forbidden to enter. The many sages who opposed Rabbi Akiva were, on this occasion, right. Their views are recorded in the Talmud. Had this been the subject of their conversation, the passage would have given us some indication of the fact. My conclusion is that Roth was wrong.
There <i>was</i> a drama in Benei Brak that night, but it was a different kind of drama, with an altogether happier outcome. We can reconstruct, with some degree of certainty, what happened. But first we need to engage in a journey of discovery to understand the background of that evening and what was at stake.
The first thing to note is the halakhic significance of the episode. We have just said in the Haggada, “Even were we all wise, all intelligent, all aged and all knowledgeable in the Torah, still the command would be upon us to tell of the coming out of Egypt; and the more one tells of the coming out of Egypt, the more admirable it is.” Three points are being made here. (1) The duty of reciting the Haggada is not only to teach it to children; we must also teach it to ourselves. (2) We must recount it each year even though we already know the story. (3) The command has no fixed limit. Unlike, for example, the story of Purim, which we recount by reading the Megilla, in the case of Pesaḥ the duty of recounting the Exodus is not confined to reciting the text. The more deeply we enter into it, reflecting, expounding, adding new insights, the more we are worthy of praise.
How do we know these things, especially the last? In many cases the rabbis brought a proof from a biblical verse. But in some, they brought a proof from precedent, from the actions of the sages. The technical phrase for such a proof is <i>ma’aseh rav</i>, “the force of precedent is great.” A sage may, for example, advance a halakhic opinion speculatively (<i>halakha velo lema’aseh</i>). This is how the law appears to him. Nonetheless he may not always be willing to act – or instruct others to act – on the basis of this opinion until it has been tested against and approved by his contemporaries. When a sage acts in a certain way, this is a far stronger demonstration of the law. It shows that not merely does he believe the law to be thus; he is prepared to put it into practice. Thus, <i>ma’aseh rav</i> – “an act is a strong proof of the law” when it is an act performed by an acknowledged halakhic authority.
The opening word of the passage about the sages in Benei Brak, <i>Ma’aseh</i>, “Once,” is therefore no mere introduction. It is a statement that the event to be related has halakhic force. It tells us what the law is. The fact that five of the greatest sages of the Mishna stayed up all night telling the story of the Exodus is a proof of all three rules in the previous paragraph. We now know what is at stake in the episode. Whether or not this was their conscious intent, the sages of Benei Brak were establishing an important set of laws that apply to us, especially the duty to tell the story “at great length.”
Secondly, we note that there is no other version of this gathering in the rabbinic literature. There is, however, a parallel passage, full of interest and dating from approximately (possibly, as we shall see, exactly) the same time. It appears in an appendix to the Mishna, known as the Tosefta (<i>Pesaḥim</i> 10:12). Reading it, we see several significant differences between it and the account in the Haggada:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Once, Rabban Gamliel and the elders were reclining in the house of Boethus ben Zonin at Lod, and they were occupied in studying the laws of Pesaḥ all that night, until the cock crowed. They lifted the table, made themselves ready, and went to the house of study [to pray].</span>
The differences are these: (1) This seder takes place in Lod, not Benei Brak. (2) Rabban Gamliel is present here, but not in Benei Brak. (3) None of the sages in Benei Brak are mentioned here. (4) The subject of their conversation was not “the coming out of Egypt” but “the laws of Pesaḥ.” Each of these details will turn out to be significant.
There is one further passage we must note. It will prove to be the key that unlocks the entire mystery. It has to do with seating plans, and belongs to <i>hilkhot derekh eretz</i>, the rules of etiquette:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The exilarch [lay head of Babylonian Jewry] said to Rav Sheshet: “Although you are venerable rabbis, yet the Persians are better versed than you in the etiquette of a meal. When there are two couches, the senior guest takes his place first and then the junior one above him. When there are three couches, the senior occupies the middle one, the next in rank takes the place above him, and the third one below him.”…Rav Sheshet said: “I know only a <i>baraita</i> [supplementary teaching] in which it is taught: What is the order of reclining? When there are two couches, the senior reclines first, and then the junior takes his place below him. When there are three, the senior takes his place first, the second next above him, and then the third below him.” (<i>Berakhot</i> 46b)</span>
The subject at issue is the seating arrangement when there are several guests, and when all are reclined in the ancient manner on couches or <i>chaises longues</i>, with individual tables in front of each. That is a form of seating still known in the Orient, and we recall it on Pesaḥ when we recline to drink the wine and for other parts of the service. The question is: how are the guests arranged? The answer, common to both Persian and rabbinic practice, is that the senior person present sits in the center. This fact leads us to a crucial observation about the episode in Benei Brak.
The order of the names tells us the seating arrangement that night. It reveals the surprising fact that, though he was neither the eldest nor the most learned of those present, <i>the senior guest that night, sitting in the center, was Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria</i>. The next senior, sitting directly above him, was Rabbi Yehoshua. Below him was Rabbi Akiva. We can now date the episode precisely. It belongs to the period – a brief one – when <i>Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria was</i> nasi<i>, religious head of the Jewish community</i>. The placement of the sages is exactly what we would expect at that time and no other. Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria has the seat of honor by virtue of his official position. Next to him is Rabbi Yehoshua, his deputy. On his other side is Rabbi Akiva, the host. Benei Brak was Rabbi Akiva’s town, where he was the local chief rabbi (<i>mara de’atra</i>). Flanking them were Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Tarfon, two elder statesmen of the halakhic community (Rabbi Tarfon was Rabbi Akiva’s first teacher), neither of them, however, holding office within the community. Not only can we now date the episode, but we can set it in historical context.
For almost a century the Jewish community in Israel had been in a state of disarray. There were profound religious divisions. Josephus tells us that the nation was divided into three groups: the worldly and powerful Sadducees, the religious and popular Pharisees, and the sectarians known as the Essenes, among whom were the Qumran community known to us through the Dead Sea Scrolls. The Pharisees themselves were divided. Under Roman rule the Great Sanhedrin, the supreme Jewish court, had been disbanded. This left the religious community without an ultimate authority. The sages, split between the disciples of Hillel and Shammai, taught in separate “schools.” Tradition records the sense of people at that time that “the Torah was becoming two Torahs.” The overwhelming impression conveyed by the documentary evidence of the time is that the Jewish community was hopelessly factionalized.
It could not have happened at a worse time. Relations with Rome, the ruling power, were bad. A series of inept governors had offended Jewish sensibilities. There were sporadic protests and revolts. These culminated in the fateful “Great Rebellion” of 66 ce. If it were to succeed, Jews would need to summon all their powers in an agreed and concerted effort. Rome was the world power of the day. Its armies were highly trained and disciplined. In retrospect the rebellion was fated to fail. Jews had immense fighting spirit. What they lacked in weapons they more than made up for in morale and determination. But what doomed the enterprise was internal disagreement. Josephus, an eyewitness of the key events, draws a vivid picture of life within the besieged capital of Jerusalem. At times Jews were more intent on fighting one another than the Romans outside the walls. Looking back on the tragedy the Talmud says, “Jerusalem was destroyed only because of <i>sin’at ḥinam</i>, the internal conflict between Jews” (<i>Yoma</i> 9b). It was an immense and epoch-making defeat. The Temple went up in flames, the second time it had been destroyed. The rebellion was suppressed, with those manning the last outpost – at Masada – committing suicide rather than being taken captive alive. Outwardly Jews had been defeated by the Romans. Inwardly they knew they had defeated themselves. A thousand years later, in a letter written to the sages of Marseilles, Maimonides put it simply. The Jews of the time had not learned the lessons of government and military command. They had not learned how to maintain unity.
It is against this background that a key figure emerges, Rabban Gamliel the second. Tradition tells us that Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai, in secret negotiations with the Roman general Vespasian, secured a concession. “Grant me,” he said, “Yavneh and its sages” (<i>Gittin</i> 56b). The town of Yavneh was the site of an important rabbinical academy. Yoḥanan ben Zakkai now turned it into a kind of surrogate capital in place of the ruined Jerusalem. But Jews needed more than a place. They needed a leader. What Yoḥanan did, in effect, was to restore and even strengthen the role of <i>nasi</i>. With the breakdown of political structures, the <i>nasi</i> could now emerge as more than a scholar and judge. He became the representative of the people in its relations with Rome. As Ḥatam Sofer noted in one of his responsa, the <i>nasi</i> became a kind of king in an age when Jews lacked any other recognized lay authority. Rabban Yoḥanan never held this title himself. The man who did so at Yavneh was Rabban Gamliel. His deputy was Rabbi Yehoshua.
The Talmud records three occasions on which they disagreed. Each became a <i>cause célèbre</i>. On one occasion Rabbi Yehoshua and Rabban Gamliel gave conflicting rulings on a firstborn animal whose lip became blemished (<i>Bekhorot</i> 36a). Not content to override his deputy, Rabban Gamliel made him stand in disgrace in the presence of the scholarly assembly. The other sages protested – not against Rabban Gamliel’s ruling but rather against the high-handed manner in which he enforced it.
A second occurred when Rabban Gamliel fixed the New Moon on the basis of eyewitness testimony that other sages regarded as suspect (Mishna <i>Rosh HaShana</i> 2:9). Rabbi Yehoshua took the side of the doubters. Rabban Gamliel then ordered him to appear before him on the day that, according to Rabbi Yehoshua’s calculation, was Yom Kippur, carrying his staff and money belt. This was a brutal humiliation. On this occasion, however, Rabbi Yehoshua’s colleagues advised him to submit to the <i>nasi</i>. The fixing of the calendar depended on the authority of the court, and if Rabbi Yehoshua called Rabban Gamliel’s ruling into question, the whole judicial system might collapse. Rabbi Yehoshua complied, but the episode added to the sense of unease.
Finally a question arose as to the halakhic status of the daily evening prayer. Was it obligatory or optional? Rabbi Yehoshua held that it was optional. Rabban Gamliel ruled that it was obligatory. Rabbi Yehoshua was prepared to withdraw his opinion, but once again Rabban Gamliel ordered him to remain standing while the house of study was in session, as a gesture of submission to the <i>nasi</i>. This last provocation proved too great. The assembled scholars voted to remove Rabban Gamliel from office. In his place they appointed Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria. Eventually Rabban Gamliel acknowledged his defeat, apologized to Rabbi Yehoshua, and was restored to office, though Rabbi Elazar remained, at least nominally, his junior partner. It was during this brief period of Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria’s leadership that the seder in Benei Brak took place. We now understand why he was seated at the center and why Rabban Gamliel was absent. It may even be that the seder of Rabban Gamliel, at the house of Boethus in Lod, took place at the same time. This would explain why none of the other leading sages was there. Rabban Gamliel was temporarily in disgrace. The other scholars had gone elsewhere, to the home of Rabbi Akiva, the supreme Torah sage of the time.
Inevitably, Rabban Gamliel earned the reputation of being a high-handed and excessively authoritarian leader. To a degree, though, this is unjust. His task, as <i>nasi</i> at Yavneh, was to reunite a religious leadership traumatized by the divisions of the past. “There can be only one leader in a generation,” said the sages, “not two” (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 8b). If the rabbis were to emerge as the guiding force of a Jewry devastated by defeat and the loss of the Temple, they had to speak with a single voice. The ruthlessness with which Rabban Gamliel suppressed dissent has less to do with his character than with the need of the hour. In the end, though, the rabbis decided as a collective body that this would not do. Rabbinic leadership must be based on collegiality and mutual respect, and a willingness to give an honorable audience to conflicting views. Until Rabban Gamliel was ready to accede to these principles, he was unfit to lead.
This is the background to the drama that was about to unfold in Benei Brak. The atmosphere was fraught. Seeking unity, the sages had found themselves having to take the unprecedented step of deposing their own head. Huge responsibility now lay on Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria and his colleagues to heal the wounds and restore amicable relations. Unfortunately, at this very moment, a major controversy was in the making – and it was almost certain to come to a head on the seder night itself.
Until when may one tell the story of the going out of Egypt? It depends on the answer to another question. Until when, in Temple times, could you eat the Paschal lamb? The Torah states, “And you shall tell your child on that day, ‘Because of this the Lord acted for me when I went out of Egypt’” (Ex. 13:8). The word “this” implies that one is pointing at something while telling the story. From this, the rabbis inferred that one may recount the story of the Exodus only “when matza and bitter herbs [and in Temple times, the Paschal lamb] are there [on the table] before you.” So the two times are linked. While the food is there, one may and should recount. Once it has been eaten, the time for telling the story is over. What is the final deadline?
On this the sages disagreed – precisely those sages present in Benei Brak. About the eating of the Paschal lamb, Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria and Rabbi Eliezer ruled that it must be done by midnight. Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yehoshua held that it could be done until dawn (<i>Berakhot</i> 9a). Elsewhere (<i>Mekhilta, Bo</i>; Tosefta<i> Pesaḥim</i> 10:11) it is clear that what applies to eating applies to telling. Rabbi Eliezer, who holds that the eating must be done by midnight, also holds that one may discourse only until midnight. Other sages, who held that the eating could be done until dawn, also maintained that one may and should talk about Pesaḥ “all that night.”
This, then, was the situation in Benei Brak. The rabbis, needing above all a period of peace and unity, were about to collide. Four of the five sages present that night held opposing views on how long they could continue their discussion. Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria and Rabbi Eliezer held that it had to cease at midnight. Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yehoshua were of the view that they should carry on through the night until dawn. The question was bound to arise and generate disagreement. Moreover, it set the newly appointed <i>nasi</i> against both his deputy, Rabbi Yehoshua, and his host, Rabbi Akiva. It was just the kind of conflict they had hoped to avoid, but it was unavoidable. Or was it?
The Talmud records a fascinating confrontation some years before. Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai had, as we saw, transferred the center of Jewish power from the Temple in Jerusalem to the academy in Yavneh. To what extent could Yavneh become a second Jerusalem? The question arose the first year after the destruction of the Second Temple that Rosh HaShana fell on Shabbat. In the Temple the shofar was blown on Shabbat, but nowhere else. Could the shofar now be blown on Shabbat in Yavneh? Rabban Yoḥanan said yes. A more traditionalist group, known as the Benei Betera, said no. Yavneh was not Jerusalem; the academy was not the Temple. The following dialogue then ensued:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Rabban Yoḥanan ben Zakkai said to them, “Let us blow.” They replied, “Let us discuss.” He said, “Let us blow first and then discuss.” [They agreed.] After the shofar had been blown, they said, “Now let us discuss.” He replied, “The shofar has already been heard at Yavneh, and after the act has already been done, there is nothing to discuss!” (<i>Rosh HaShana</i> 29b)</span>
It was a brilliant coup. Rabban Yoḥanan won the argument by creating a <i>fait accompli</i>. That is precisely what now happened in Benei Brak. Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yehoshua engaged the others in conversation and debate so enthralling that they lost all sense of time.
Unlike Rabban Gamliel in Lod, who spent the evening discussing “the laws of Pesaḥ,” this was the one subject they were determined to avoid. Any discussion about law would have led them directly to the question of the time limit of the seder, and thus to potentially explosive disagreement. Instead they spoke about “the coming out from Egypt” – <i>Aggada</i>, not halakha; the narrative rather than the law. Their aim was to make Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria and Rabbi Eliezer forget the time. Not only would they thereby avoid any conflict, they would also establish the law itself, that “the more one tells…the more admirable it is” – without any limit on time. The fact that the five leading sages of the generation continued their discussions until dawn would create a binding precedent under the rule of <i>ma’aseh rav</i>, that “an act is proof of the law.”
It worked brilliantly. So engrossed were Rabbi Elazar and Rabbi Eliezer that they failed to notice when their deadline of midnight passed. They were still talking when the disciples arrived to tell them, “Teachers – the time for saying the <i>Shema</i> of the morning has come.” Dawn was approaching. The evening had passed without the question of time limits arising, and Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yehoshua had succeeded in establishing the law according to their reading of it. Tradition is silent on what the other two sages said when they finally realized the <i>fait accompli</i> so skillfully achieved against them. My guess is that they acknowledged defeat graciously. It would not have taken them long to realize not only what had been done, but also why. Rabbi Akiva and Rabbi Yehoshua were not interested in personal victory. They cared about the integrity of the Jewish people and its spiritual leadership. They knew the rabbis could not afford yet another dispute of the kind that had split the schools of Hillel and Shammai and in their own time led to the removal of Rabban Gamliel from office. It was a victory not only for truth but also for peace, and it was a necessary one at that time and place.
Who knows whether that Pesaḥ, isolated from his colleagues, Rabban Gamliel himself might not have reconsidered his position and come to the decision that he must make amends with Rabbi Yehoshua and his other erstwhile colleagues? At any rate he did so soon afterward, and was restored to office. The fraught moment passed, and friendships were remade. The sages became the acknowledged leaders of the Jewish people, a role they held for many centuries thereafter. It might have been otherwise. That is the significance of the seder night in Benei Brak, and of the healing power of conversation about the going out from Egypt.

Women and the Exodus

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>By merit of the righteous women of that generation, Israel was redeemed from Egypt.</i> (<i>Sota</i> 11b)</small></span>
The human hero of the Exodus was Moses. It was he who saw the suffering of his people and came to the defense of a man being beaten by an Egyptian taskmaster, and it was he who heard the call of God, confronted Pharaoh, and led the Israelites out of Egypt and into the desert on the long journey to the Promised Land. Moses dominates the biblical story – prophet, leader, and lawgiver, the epic figure standing between God and the people, wrestling with both.
Yet the opening chapters of Exodus tell another story, no less fascinating, perhaps more so. A close reading of the text reveals that alongside the hero, matching his strength in the face of tyranny, was a series of heroines. The human face of the Exodus is the story of six remarkable women. Without Moses there might have been no exodus. But without the heroism of women there would have been no Moses. Who were they?
The first was Yokheved, Moses’ mother. I try to imagine the courage of a woman willing to have a child once the decree has been issued to “throw every boy who is born into the river” (Ex. 1:22). The scene is Germany, 1939. Anti-Jewish edicts are in force. There is a sense of impending tragedy. To have a child at that time is a supreme act of hope in the midst of despair. That is the bravery of Yokheved.
What do we know about her? Surprisingly little. Her first appearance in the text is conspicuously anonymous: “A man from the house of Levi went and married a daughter of Levi” (Ex. 2:1). At this stage neither of Moses’ parents, Amram and Yokheved, is named. We soon see Yokheved’s resourcefulness. For three months she hides the child. When she can do so no longer, she makes a rush basket and sets him afloat on the Nile, hoping he will be noticed and saved. Like many biblical women, she is a person of action, determination, and courage. What else do we know about her?
Only this, that she gives birth to three children destined for greatness: Miriam, the prophetess, Aaron, Israel’s first high priest, and Moses, its greatest leader. She endows her children, genetically or by example, with the gift of leadership. We can infer something more. She and her husband are both from the tribe of Levi. A few chapters earlier, the Torah has told us in connection with Levi, Jacob’s third-born child, that his father did not see him destined for great things. Together with Simeon, he had rescued their sister Dina at the cost of what Jacob thought was excessive violence. On his deathbed he delivers both a prediction and a curse: “Simeon and Levi are brothers; their wares are instruments of violence. Let my soul not enter their council, my heart not join their company, for in their anger they killed men and hamstrung oxen as they pleased. Cursed be their anger for it is fierce, and their fury, for it is cruel” (Gen. 49:5).
We hear little subsequently about Simeon. But the children of Levi defy Jacob’s low opinion. From their ranks will eventually come not only the three leaders of the Exodus, but Israel’s priests and Levites, its spiritual ministers, for all time. There is more than a hint that something in Yokheved – her capacity for hope or her faith in life – transforms, in her children, violence into courage, and aggression into an unshakable determination to rescue people and set them on the path to liberty. She has the subtle gift of transforming vice into virtue. She becomes the mother of Israel’s leaders.
The second woman is Miriam, Yokheved’s daughter, Moses’ elder sister. What we know about her is no less impressive. She takes the risk of following the rush basket containing the baby as it floats down the Nile. She sees it taken out of the water by an Egyptian princess. Not content with witnessing its rescue, she takes a remarkable initiative. She goes up to the princess and offers to find a Hebrew woman to nurse the child. The result is that Moses, against all odds, is taken home and brought up in his own family. Miriam is the child slave who has the confidence to be undaunted in the presence of royalty, the courage to speak openly to the daughter of her people’s oppressor, and the resourcefulness to think of a way of bringing the baby back to its home. We sense in her qualities of character of a high order. Without her, Moses might never have known his identity. He would have grown up not knowing he was an Israelite. As if sensing what was at stake, Miriam performs a role that in retrospect was crucial for Israel’s redemption – one of the few instances in the Bible (David’s encounter with Goliath is another) in which heroism is attributed to a child.
Jewish tradition, however, ascribes to her a gesture more remarkable still:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Amram was the most eminent man of his generation. Aware that Pharaoh had decreed, “Every son who is born shall be cast into the river” [Ex. 1:22], he said, “In vain do we labor,” and was the first to divorce his wife. After that, all the Israelite men divorced their wives. Then his daughter said to him, “Father, your decree is more cruel than Pharaoh’s. He has decreed only against the males; you decree against both males and females. Pharaoh decreed only concerning this world, while you decree concerning both this world and the next. Since Pharaoh is a wicked man, there is doubt whether his decree will be fulfilled or not; but since you are a righteous man, your decree is sure to be fulfilled.” At once, he went and took back his wife, and so did all the others. (<i>Sota</i> 12a)</span>
What are we to make of this strange suggestion?
Rabbinic commentaries of this kind are sometimes described as “legends.” That is not what they are. In filling the gaps of the biblical text – reading between its lines – Israel’s early rabbinic sages were doing two things. Firstly, they were listening (the word “reading” is inadequate) to the nuances of the biblical text. In the wake of the destruction of the Second Temple, midrash, or biblical exposition, became the rabbinic substitute for prophecy. God was “hiding His face.” He was no longer manifest in Israel’s fate. But He had left something of His presence behind: the Torah, the covenant, His “marriage contract” with the Jewish people. When two lovers are present, they rejoice in one another’s company. When one disappears and the other awaits his return, she reads and rereads the letters he wrote her, sensitive to every detail, discovering aspects of his character she had not noticed before, and bringing back a vestige of presence in the midst of absence. That is midrash: the close reading of the Torah, in the wake of national tragedy, as God’s love letters to His people.
Listening to the biblical passage (Deut. 26:5–8) that forms the centerpiece of the Haggada, the sages heard in the phrase “He [God] saw our oppression” an echo of other contexts in which the word “oppression” appears and has a specific sexual connotation. “Oppression,” as we say in the Haggada, refers to “the separation of husband from wife.” From this hint they then reconstructed the following scenario: once Pharaoh had decreed that all male babies were to be murdered, the Israelites decided not to have children. To bring a child into the world with a fifty-fifty chance of being killed was taking an unwarranted risk with life. For that reason the men separated from their wives. How, then, was Moses born? Something and someone must have changed the Israelites’ mind, specifically in the case of Amram, Moses’ father. That must have been either Yokheved or Miriam, the only other figures to feature in the narrative at this point. Of the two, Miriam is the obvious candidate. The text says nothing more about Yokheved than that she bore a child, whereas Miriam’s resourcefulness shines from every word written about her. It must, therefore, have been Miriam who persuaded her father that he was wrong, that his decision, logical and ethical though it was, lacked one thing, namely faith itself. That is the textual basis for the story.
Midrash is a child of prophecy, though, in another sense. The prophets were interpreters of history. They spoke to their generation and their times. Lacking prophecy, the rabbis turned to the biblical text to hear, within the word spoken for all time, the specific resonance for <i>this</i> time. Unlike <i>peshat</i>, the “plain, simple, or accepted meaning,” midrash is the hermeneutic quest for the meaning of the text as if it were spoken not then but now. Midrash is interpretation in the context of <i>covenantal time</i>, the word spoken in the past but still active in the present. It is an exercise in conscious and deliberate anachronism (the secular equivalent would be a performance of a Shakespeare tragedy in modern dress, the better to feel its force as contemporary, rather than classical, drama). It is prophetic in the sense of interpreting current events in the light of the divine word. Midrash is the attempt on the part of the sages to understand their own times as a continuation of the narrative of the covenant. In what historical context can we place the story they told of Miriam?
One of the most traumatic of all periods in Jewish history was the failure of the Bar Kokhba rebellion and its brutal suppression by the Roman emperor Hadrian. Israel was devastated and most of its leading rabbis put to death. The practice of Judaism – including the teaching of Torah and the act of circumcision – was proscribed on pain of death. A talmudic passage reveals the depth of despair the surviving rabbis felt at that time:
<span class="poetry indentAll">From the day a government has come to power that issues cruel decrees against us and forbids us the observance of the Torah and the precepts, and does not allow us to enter into the “week of the son,” we ought by rights to bind ourselves not to marry and have children, so that the seed of Abraham our father will come to an end of itself. However, let Israel go their way: it is better that they should err in ignorance than presumptuously. (<i>Bava Batra</i> 60b)</span>
This is a passage of intense pathos. The rabbis are saying nothing less than that it would have been reasonable at that point to let the Jewish people cease to be. They had been defeated by the Romans. Their last hope of recovering national sovereignty had failed. The thing that mattered above all – the practice of Judaism – was now banned. Here, therefore, is the historical context of the story the rabbis told about Miriam and Amram. It was not just in Egypt in the age of Ramses II, but in Israel in the days of Hadrian, that Jews contemplated a decision not to bring future generations into being.
The talmudic passage ends on a curious note: “Let Israel go their way.” The rabbis are saying that were they to issue the decree that seemed warranted by the circumstances – no more Jewish marriages or children – people would not listen. That is how Jews and Judaism survived. Ordinary people, suggests the Talmud, sometimes have more faith than their spiritual leaders. This is an astonishing admission, but it is not the only time the sages made it. Commenting on one of Moses’ first challenges to God, “They [the Israelites] will not believe me” (Ex. 4:1), they said, “God replied: they are believers, the children of believers, but there will come a time when you yourself will not believe” (<i>Shabbat</i> 97a).
We now sense the full depth of the encounter between daughter and father as the sages understood it. Amram was, they conjectured, “the most eminent man of his generation.” According to one tradition he was head of the Sanhedrin, the rabbinic supreme court. Yet it is not he but his daughter who rightly understood the spiritual demand of the moment: not despair, but faith in the future. The sociologist Peter Berger calls hope a “signal of transcendence” (<i>A Rumor of Angels</i>). There is nothing that logically justifies hope: if there were, it would not be hope but something else – confidence, certainty, assurance, foreknowledge. Hope is the narrow bridge across which we must walk if we are to pass from slavery to redemption, from the valley of death to the open spaces of new life. That hope, said the sages, is more likely to come from the young than the old, women (the bearers of new life) than men. It is no small testimony to their depth of self-knowledge that the rabbis attributed more faith to a young girl than to Amram, leader of his generation.
The third figure is Pharaoh’s daughter, who rescued Moses, knowing he was a Hebrew child. Again it is impossible not to be moved by this act of compassion by one who knew all too well what was at stake. To raise an Israelite child in the palace of the very ruler who had issued the decree of death took moral determination of a high order. A midrash states that when her handmaids saw that she was set on rescuing the baby, they said, “It is the way of the world that when a king issues a decree, even if the whole world does not obey it, his own children and household do” (<i>Exodus Raba</i> 1:23). For any Egyptian to protect a Hebrew child was hazardous; to do so in the royal palace doubly so. In Yad Vashem, the Holocaust museum in Jerusalem, there is an avenue of remembrance for the righteous gentiles who saved Jewish lives during the Nazi years. Pharaoh’s daughter created the precedent.
It is notable that she gives Moses his name (<i>Mses</i> – as in Ramses – is in fact an Egyptian word meaning “child”). Names, in the Torah, are given by parents and in rare cases ordained or changed by God. Moses is the exception. Again a midrash emphasizes the point: “This is the reward for doers of kindness: although Moses had many names, the only one by which he is known through the Torah is that given to him by Pharaoh’s daughter. Even the Holy One, blessed be He, did not call him by any other name” (<i>Exodus Raba</i> 1:26).
Pharaoh’s daughter is not mentioned by name. There is, however, a reference in the Book of Chronicles (I 4:18) to a certain “Bitya, daughter of Pharaoh,” and tradition identifies her with Moses’ rescuer. The name “Bitya” means “daughter of God” and the rabbis speculated that this was not her original name, but one given to her by God in recognition of her kindness: “Moses was not your son,” He said, “yet you called him your son. You, too, are not My daughter, but I shall call you My daughter” (<i>Leviticus Raba</i> 1:3).
The fourth heroine is Moses’ wife, Tzippora, daughter of the Midianite priest Yitro. The first thing that strikes us about Tzippora is that she was willing to accompany Moses on his return to Egypt, despite the hazards of the journey, the risk of the mission, and the fact that the Israelites were not her people, even if she had adopted their faith. There is, however, one moment during the return journey when Tzippora saves Moses’ life. The passage is cryptic in the extreme:
<span class="poetry indentAll">During the journey, while they were encamped for the night, God confronted Moses and wanted to kill him. Tzippora took a stone knife and cut off her son’s foreskin, throwing it down at Moses’ feet; then she said: “Blood bridegroom by circumcision.” (Ex. 4:24–5)</span>
These two verses contain multiple ambiguities. God was angry with Moses, evidently because he had not circumcised his son. According to some, Moses delayed the operation because of the debilitating effect of the journey. According to others, he had agreed with his father-in-law that at least one of his children would be brought up not as an Israelite but as a Midianite. Whatever the interpretation, Tzippora’s prompt action saved a life. One midrash attributes to her the level of righteousness of the matriarchs, Sarah, Rebecca, Rachel, and Leah.
The fifth and sixth are the midwives, Shifra and Pua, whom Pharaoh instructed to kill every male Hebrew child. The Torah then reports:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The midwives feared God and did not do what the Egyptian king had commanded; they allowed the infant boys to live. The king of Egypt summoned the midwives and said to them, “Why did you do this? You let the boys live.” The midwives replied to Pharaoh, “The Hebrew women are not like the Egyptians: they know how to deliver; they can give birth even before a midwife gets to them.” God was good to the midwives, and the people increased and became very numerous. Because the midwives feared God, He made them houses [of their own]. (Ex. 1:17–21)</span>
Who were Shifra and Pua? The truth is, we do not know. One midrash identifies them with Yokheved and Miriam, using a midrashic technique of relating the unknown to the known. However, in describing them the Torah uses an ambiguous phrase. It calls them <i>hameyaldot ha’Ivriot</i>, which could mean either “the Hebrew midwives” or “the midwives to the Hebrews.” On the second interpretation, they may not have been Hebrews at all, but Egyptians. This is the view taken, among others, by the scholar and statesman Don Isaac Abrabanel and the Italian commentator Samuel David Luzzatto. Luzzatto’s reasoning is simple: could Pharaoh realistically have expected Hebrew women to murder their own people’s children? Rather than decide one way or the other, it seems clear that the Torah’s ambiguity on this point is deliberate. We do not know who they were or which people they belonged to because their particular form of moral courage transcended nationality and race. In essence, they were being asked to commit a “crime against humanity,” and the fact that they refused to do so tells us something about the ethical parameters of humanity as such. Though Shifra and Pua are seemingly minor figures in the narrative, they are giants in the story of humanity, and since their behavior has bearing on more recent events, it is a tale that deserves to be set in its full historical context.
One landmark of modern international law was the judgment against Nazi war criminals in the Nuremberg trials of 1946. This established that there are certain crimes in relation to which the claim “I was obeying orders” is no defense. There are laws higher than those of the state. “Crimes against humanity” remain crimes, whatever the law of the land or the orders of a government. There are instructions one is morally bound to disobey, times when civil disobedience is the morally necessary response. This principle, attributed to the American writer Henry David Thoreau in 1848, inspired many of those who fought for the abolition of slavery in the United States, as well as the late Martin Luther King in his struggle for black civil rights in the 1960s. At stake in the principle of civil disobedience is a theory of the moral limits of the state.
Until relatively modern times rulers had absolute authority, tempered only by the concessions they had to make to powerful groups. Not only was this true in antiquity. It remained the case until the late seventeenth century, when figures like John Locke began to develop theories of liberty, social contract, and human rights (see “The Universal Story,” earlier in this book). Much, even most, religious thought until then was dedicated to justifying existing structures of power. That was the function of myth, and later of the concept of the “divine right of kings.” In such societies, the idea that there might be moral limits to power would have been unthinkable. To challenge the king was to defy reality itself.
Against this background, biblical monotheism was a revolution thousands of years in advance of the culture of the West. The Exodus was more than the liberation of slaves. It was a redrawing of the moral and political landscape. If the image of God is to be found not only in kings but in the human person as such, then all power that dehumanizes is <i>ipso facto</i> an abuse of power. Slavery, seen by all ancient thinkers as part of the natural order, becomes morally wrong, an offense not only against man but against God. When God tells Moses to talk to Pharaoh of “My son, My firstborn, Israel” (Ex. 4:22), He is announcing to the most powerful ruler of the ancient world that though these people may be your slaves, they are My children. The story of the plagues in Egypt is as much political as theological. Theologically it affirms that the Creator of nature is supreme over the forces of nature. Politically it declares that over every human power stands the sovereignty of God, defender and guarantor of the rights of mankind.
In such a worldview, the idea of civil disobedience is not unthinkable but self-evident. The very notion of authority is defined by the transcendence of right over might, morality over power. Even when wrongfully challenged, leadership has to justify itself. Hence Moses’ words to God during the Koraḥ rebellion: “I have not taken so much as a donkey from them, nor have I wronged any of them” (Num. 16:15). In one of the world-changing moments in history, social criticism was born in Israel simultaneously with institutionalization of power. No sooner were there kings in Israel than there were prophets mandated by God to criticize them when they abused their power.
Not only is this true of Israel’s internal politics. It applied equally when Jews found themselves in exile under foreign powers. The Books of Daniel and Esther – the classic exilic texts – are variations on the theme of civil disobedience. Ḥanania, Mishael, and Azaria refuse to bow down to Nebuchadnezzar’s golden image. Daniel disobeys Darius’ command to worship him alone. Mordekhai will not bow down to Haman. A “stiff-necked people” may sometimes find it hard to worship God, but it will certainly worship nothing less. As the Talmud puts it: “If there is a conflict between the words of the master and the words of the disciple, whose words should one obey?” (<i>Kiddushin</i> 42b) No human order, whoever issues it, overrides the commands of God.
This is further evidence of the case I have argued in chapters 9–11, that the Western tradition of liberty is built less on the foundations of ancient Greece than on the Hebrew Bible. What Greece lacked was a theory of the moral limits of power. As Lord Acton noted, Athenian democracy failed because the Greeks believed that “there is no law superior to that of the State – the lawgiver is above the law” (<i>History of Freedom</i>). The result, he writes, was that “the possession of unlimited power, which corrodes the conscience, hardens the heart, and confounds the understanding of monarchs, exercised its demoralizing influence on the illustrious democracy of Athens,” as it has so often since. Greek political thought assumes the sovereignty of the state. Jewish political thought assumes the sovereignty of God, and hence the moral limits of the state. That is why the Torah is the foundational text of liberty and human rights, rather than the Greek political classics.
How moving it is, therefore, that the first recorded instance of civil disobedience – predating Thoreau by more than three millennia – is the story of Shifra and Pua, two ordinary women defying Pharaoh in the name of simple humanity. We know nothing else about them, not even which nation they came from. All we know is that they “feared God and did not do what the Egyptian king had commanded.” In those fateful words, a precedent was set that eventually became the basis of the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights. Shifra and Pua, by refusing to obey an immoral order, redefined the moral landscape of the world.
One further note is in place. Though Greek literature does not know of the concept of civil disobedience, it does contain one famous case where an individual defies the king, not in the name of justice but out of loyalty to established custom and family feeling – Sophocles’ Antigone, who buries her brother in defiance of King Creon’s order that he stay unburied as a traitor. The contrast between Sophocles and the Bible is fascinating. <i>Antigone</i> is a tragedy: the eponymous heroine pays for her defiance with her life. The story of Shifra and Pua is not a tragedy. It ends with a curious phrase. God “made them houses.” What does this mean? Luzzatto offers an insightful interpretation. Sometimes women become midwives when they are unable to have children of their own. That, he suggests, was the case with Shifra and Pua. Because they saved children’s lives, God rewards them – measure for measure – with the blessing of their own children (“houses” = families). In Judaism the moral life is not inescapably tragic, because neither the universe nor fate is blind.
“By merit of the righteous women of that generation, Israel was redeemed from Egypt” (<i>Sota</i> 11b). There are many midrashic traditions about the faithfulness of women during the days of oppression in Egypt and the subsequent journey to the Promised Land (according to the sages, they joined neither in worship of the golden calf, nor in the doubts that led to the episode of the spies). I have chosen these six examples, however, because they are explicit in the biblical text. Each is a vignette of courage in the face of power, and faith in the presence of despair. The story of the Exodus as we tell it at the seder table is about God, not about human beings. Even Moses is mentioned only once in the Haggada, as an aside. Yet there was a human aspect to the story, and it is about one great man and six outstanding women.
Moses became a hero because he had “greatness thrust upon him.” He led Israel not because he chose to, but because he was commanded by God. Yokheved, Miriam, Bitya, Tzippora, Shifra, and Pua were not commanded. They acted because they had a strong moral sense, indomitable humanity, and an intuitive grasp of what heaven asks of us on earth: they “feared God.” The monument the Torah erects to freedom, the sovereignty of God, and the sanctity of life bears the names of those women who by their courage showed that though tyranny is strong, compassion is stronger still.

The Missing Fifth

Many commentators, among them the Vilna Gaon, have drawn attention to the influence of the number four in connection with the Haggada. There are four fours:
<span class="poetry indentAll">1. the four questions<br>2. the four sons<br>3. the four cups of wine<br>4. the four expressions of redemption: “I will <i>bring you out</i> from under the yoke of the Egyptians and <i>deliver</i> you from their slavery; I will <i>redeem</i> you with an outstretched arm and with mighty judgment. I will <i>take</i> you to Me as a nation.” (Ex. 6:6–7)</span>
It may be, though, that just as an X-ray can reveal an earlier painting beneath the surface of a later one, so beneath the surface of the Haggada there is another pattern to be discerned. That is what I want to suggest in this chapter.
The first thing to note is that there is, in fact, another “four” on the seder night, namely the four biblical verses whose exposition forms an important part of the Haggada:
<span class="poetry indentAll">1. “An Aramean sought my father’s death.”<br>2. “And the Egyptians dealt cruelly with us and oppressed us.”<br>3. “And we cried to the Lord, God of our ancestors.”<br>4. “And the Lord brought us out of Egypt.” (Deut. 26:5–8)</span>
There are, then, not four fours, but five.
In early editions of the talmudic Tractate <i>Pesaḥim</i> (118a) there is a passage that perplexed the medieval commentators. It reads: “Rabbi Tarfon says: over the <i>fifth</i> cup we recite the great Hallel.” The medieval commentators were puzzled by this because elsewhere the rabbinic literature speaks about four cups, not five. The Mishna, for example, states that a poor person must be supplied with enough money to buy four cups of wine. In both the Babylonian and Jerusalem Talmuds, the discussion revolves around the assumption that there are four cups on seder night. How then are we to understand the statement of Rabbi Tarfon that there is a fifth cup?
Among the commentators three views emerged. The first was that of Rashi (Rabbi Shlomo ben Yitzhak, 1040–1105) and the Tosafists. According to them, there are only four cups on the seder night, and it is forbidden to drink a fifth. The statement of Rabbi Tarfon must therefore be a misprint, and the texts of the Talmud should be amended accordingly.
The second was that of Maimonides. He holds that there is a fifth cup, but unlike the other four, it is optional rather than obligatory. The mishna that teaches that a poor person must be given enough money to buy four cupfuls of wine means that we must ensure that he has the opportunity to fulfill his obligation. It does not extend to the fifth cup, which is permitted but not compulsory. Rabbi Tarfon’s statement is to be understood to mean that those who wish to drink a fifth cup should do so during the recitation of the great Hallel.
The third view, that of Ravad of Posquières, a contemporary of Maimonides, is that one <i>should</i> drink a fifth cup. There is a difference in Jewish law between an obligation, or <i>ḥova</i>, and a religiously significant good deed, or mitzva. The first four cups are obligatory. The fifth is a mitzva, meaning not obligatory but still praiseworthy, and not merely, as Maimonides taught, optional.
Thus there was a controversy over the fifth cup. Rashi said we should not drink it; Maimonides said we may; Ravad said we should. What does one do, faced with this kind of disagreement? Jewish law tries wherever possible to propose a solution that pays respect to all views, especially when they are held by great halakhic authorities. The solution in the present case was simple. A fifth cup is poured (out of respect for Ravad and Maimonides) but not drunk (out of respect for Rashi).
When a disagreement in the Talmud is not resolved, the sages often use the word <i>Teiku</i>, “Let it stand.” We believe such disagreements will be resolved in the time to come when Elijah arrives to announce the coming of the Messiah. One of his roles will be to rule on unresolved halakhic controversies. An allusion to this task is to be found in the word <i>Teiku</i> itself, which was read as an abbreviation of <i>Tishbi yetaretz kushiyot ve</i>’<i>ibayot</i>, “The Tishbite [Elijah] will answer questions and difficulties.” This therefore is the history behind “the cup of Elijah” – the cup we fill after the meal but do not drink. It represents the “fifth cup” mentioned in the Talmud.
According to the Jerusalem Talmud, the reason we have four cups of wine is because of the four expressions of redemption in God’s promise to Moses. How, then, could Rabbi Tarfon suggest that there are not four cups but five? <i>The fascinating fact is that if we look at the biblical passage, there are not four expressions of redemption but five</i>. The passage continues: “And I will <i>bring</i> you to the land I swore with uplifted hand to give to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; I will give it to you as a possession – I am the Lord” (Ex. 6:8).
There is a further missing fifth. As mentioned above, during the course of reciting the Haggada we expound four biblical verses, beginning with, “An Aramean sought my father’s death.” In biblical times, this was the declaration made by someone bringing firstfruits to Jerusalem. However, if we turn to the source we discover that there is a fifth verse to this passage: “He <i>brought us to this place</i> [the land of Israel] and gave us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey” (Deut. 26:9). We do not recite or expound this verse at the seder table. But this is strange, since the Mishna states explicitly, “And one must expound the passage beginning, ‘An Aramean sought my father’s death,’ <i>until one has completed the whole passage</i>” (Mishna <i>Pesaḥim</i> 10:4). In fact we do not complete the whole passage, despite the Mishna’s instruction.
So there are three “missing fifths” – the fifth cup, the fifth expression of redemption, and the fifth verse. It is also clear why. All three refer to God’s not merely bringing the Jewish people out of Egypt but also <i>bringing them into the land of Israel.</i> The Haggada as we now have it and as it evolved in rabbinic times is, in Maimonides’ words, “the Haggada as practiced in the time of exile” (<i>Mishneh Torah, Hilkhot Ḥametz Umatza</i>), meaning, during the period of the Dispersion. The missing fifth represented the missing element in redemption. How could Jews celebrate arriving in the land of Israel when they were in exile? How could they drink the last cup of redemption when they had said at the beginning of the seder, “Now [we are] slaves, next year we shall be free; now we are here; next year in the land of Israel”?
The fifth cup – poured but not drunk – was like the cup broken at Jewish weddings. It was a symbol of incompletion. It meant that as long as Jews were dispersed throughout the world, facing persecution and danger, they could not yet celebrate to the full. One great sage of the twentieth century, the late Rabbi Menaḥem Kasher, argued that now that there is a State of Israel, many exiles have been ingathered, and Jews have recovered their sovereignty and land, the fifth cup should be reinstated. That remains for the halakhic authorities to decide.
What, though, of the four questions and the four sons? There <i>was</i> a fifth question. The Mishna states that a child should ask: “On every other night we eat meat that is cooked, boiled, or roasted; but this night only roasted meat” (Mishna <i>Pesaḥim</i> 10:4). This text can still be found in the early manuscripts of the Haggada discovered in the Cairo Geniza. It refers to the time when the Temple stood and the food eaten at the seder included the Paschal offering, which was roasted. After the Temple was destroyed and the practice of eating a Paschal lamb was discontinued, this question was dropped and another (about reclining) substituted.
Was there a fifth child? The late Lubavitcher Rebbe suggested that there is a fifth child on Pesaḥ. The four children of the Haggada are all present, sitting around the table. The fifth child is the <i>one who is not there</i>, the child lost through outmarriage and assimilation. Rabbinic tradition tells us that in Egypt, many Jews assimilated and did not want to leave. The Torah uses a phrase to describe the Israelites’ departure from Egypt, <i>Vaḥamushim alu Benei Yisrael miMitzrayim</i> (Ex. 13:18). This is normally translated as “The Israelites went up out of Egypt armed for battle.” However, Rashi, citing earlier authorities, suggests that <i>ḥamush</i> may not mean “armed.” Instead it may be related to the word <i>ḥamesh</i>, “five.” The sentence could therefore be translated as “Only a fifth of the Israelites left Egypt.”
The rest, he explains, perished in the plague of darkness. The plague itself was less an affliction of the Egyptians than a way of covering the shame of the Israelites, that so many of their number did not want to leave. Certainly the loss of Jews through assimilation has been an ongoing tragedy of Jewish history. How do we allude to it on seder night? By silence: the fifth child – the one who is not there.
So beneath the surface of the Haggada we find not four fours, but five fives. In each case there is a missing fifth – a cup, an expression of deliverance, a verse, a question, and a child. Each points to something incomplete in our present situation. In the half-century since the Holocaust the Jewish people has emerged from darkness to light. The State of Israel has come into being. The Hebrew language has been reborn. Jews have been brought to safety from the countries where they faced persecution. In the liberal democracies of the West Jews have gained freedom, and even prominence and affluence.
But Israel is not yet at peace. In the Diaspora assimilation continues apace. Many Jews are estranged from their people and their faith. Something is missing from our celebration – the fifth cup, the fifth deliverance, the fifth verse, the fifth question, and the fifth child. That is a measure of what is still to be achieved. We have not yet reached our destination. The missing fifths remind us of work still to be done, a journey not yet complete.

The Art of Asking Questions

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>And if your children should ask you</i>… (Ex. 12:26)</small></span>
Socrates (469–399 bce), the great Greek philosopher and mentor of Plato, was in the habit of asking disconcerting questions. To this day, persistent questioning in search of clarity is known as the Socratic method. For this habit, among other things, he was put on trial by the Athenians, accused of “corrupting the young,” and sentenced to death. Nothing could be less like Judaism, in which teaching the young to ask questions is an essential feature of Pesaḥ, so much so that the Haggada – the narration – must be in response to a question asked by a child. If there is no child present, adults must ask one another, and if one is eating alone, one must ask oneself. In Judaism, to be without questions is a sign not of faith, but of lack of depth. “And the [child] who does not know how to ask,” you must begin to teach him how. Many customs of seder night (dipping the parsley and removing the seder plate are two examples) were introduced solely to provoke a child to ask, “Why?” Judaism is a religion of questions.
Abraham Twerski, the American psychiatrist, remembers how, when he was young, his teacher would welcome questions, the more demanding the better. When faced with a particularly tough challenge, he would say, in his broken English: “You right! You hundred prozent right! Now I show you where you wrong.” The Nobel Prize-winning Jewish physicist Isidore Rabi once explained that his mother taught him how to be a scientist. “Every other child would come back from school and be asked, ‘What did you learn today?’ But my mother used to ask instead, ‘Izzy, did you ask a good question today?’” In the yeshiva, the home of traditional talmudic learning, the highest compliment a teacher can give a student is <i>Du fregst a gutte kasha</i>, “You raise a good objection.”
Where did it come from, this Jewish passion for questions? Clearly it owes much to the fact that three times in the Torah, Moses speaks of children asking for an explanation of religious practice, and in another place it says, “You shall tell your child on that day” (Ex. 13:8). Together, these four verses serve as the basis for the “four sons” of the Haggada. Education is not indoctrination. It is teaching a child to be curious, to wonder, reflect, inquire. The child who asks becomes a partner in the learning process. He or she is no longer a passive recipient but an active participant. To ask is to grow.
But questioning goes deeper than this in Judaism – so deep as to represent a <i>sui generis</i> religious phenomenon. The heroes of faith asked questions of God, and the greater the prophet, the harder the question. Abraham asked, “Will the Judge of all the earth not perform justice?” (Gen. 18:25) Moses asked, “O Lord, why have You brought trouble upon this people?” (Ex. 5:22) Jeremiah said, “You are always righteous, O Lord, when I bring a case before You, yet I would speak with You about Your justice: Why does the way of the wicked prosper? Why do all the faithless live at ease?” (Jer. 12:1) The Book of Job, the most searching of all explorations of human suffering, is a book of questions asked by man, to which God replies with four chapters of questions of His own. The earliest sermons (known as the <i>Yelamdeinu</i> type) began with a question asked of the rabbi by a member of the congregation. One classic genre of rabbinical literature is called <i>She’elot uTeshuvot</i>, “questions and replies.” Questioning is at the heart of Jewish spirituality.
Religious faith has often been seen as naive, blind, accepting. That is not the Jewish way. Judaism is not the suspension of critical intelligence. It contains no equivalent to the famous declaration of the Christian thinker Tertullian, <i>Certum est quia impossibile est</i>, “I believe it because it is impossible.” To the contrary: asking a question is itself a profound expression of faith in the intelligibility of the universe and the meaningfulness of human life. To ask is to believe that somewhere there is an answer. The fact that throughout history people have devoted their lives to extending the frontiers of knowledge is a compelling testimony to the restlessness of the human spirit and its constant desire to go further, higher, deeper. Far from faith excluding questions, questions testify to faith – that history is not random, that the universe is not impervious to our understanding, that what happens to us is not blind chance. We ask not because we doubt, but because we believe.
There are three kinds of questions, each corresponding to a different aspect of God, Humanity, and the intellectual quest. The first belongs to the sphere of <i>ḥokhma</i>, “wisdom,” and includes scientific, historical, and sociological inquiry. Rashi interprets the phrase describing the creation of man “in Our image, according to Our likeness” (Gen. 1:26) to mean “with the power to understand and discern.” <i>Homo sapiens</i> is the only being known to us capable of framing the question “Why?” Maimonides includes scientific and philosophical understanding as part of the commands to love and fear God, because the more we understand of the universe, the more awe-inspiring it and its Architect reveal themselves to be. The sages coined a blessing for seeing a sage distinguished for his or her worldly knowledge (“Blessed are You…who has given of His wisdom to human beings”). The first request we make in the daily <i>Amida</i> prayer is “favor us with knowledge, understanding, and insight.” Human dignity is intimately related to our ability to fathom the workings of the universe, natural and social. <i>Ḥokhma</i> is an encounter with God through <i>creation</i>. Making man in His image, the creative God endowed mankind with creativity.
Second are the questions we ask about the Torah, like the four that open the seder: “Why is this night different? Why do we do this, not that? What is the reason for the law?” It is one of the most striking features of biblical Hebrew that though the Torah is full of commands – 613 of them – there is no biblical word that means “obey.” Instead the Torah uses the word <i>shema</i>, meaning, “hear, listen, reflect on, internalize, and respond.” God wants not blind obedience, but understanding response. Moses tells the Israelites that the commands are “their wisdom and understanding in the eyes of the nations” (Deut. 4:6), implying that they are amenable to human reason. In one of the historic moments of adult education, Ezra, returning from Babylon, assembles the people in Jerusalem and reads publicly from the Torah with the assistance of Levites whose task was “to make it clear and explain the meaning so that the people could understand what was being read” (Neh. 8:8). The saintly Hillel, known for his gentleness to all, nonetheless said, “An ignorant person cannot be pious” (Mishna <i>Avot</i> 2:8). The more we ask, search, and understand the Torah, the better we can internalize its values and apply them to new situations. The Torah is a meeting with God in <i>revelation</i>.
Undoubtedly, though, the most unique of Judaism’s questions and the one most associated with the prophetic tradition is about justice: why bad things happen to good people, why evil seems so often to triumph, why there is so much undeserved suffering in the world. Karl Marx once called religion “the opium of the people.” He believed that it reconciled them to their condition – their poverty, disease, and death, their station in life, their subjection to tyrannical rulers, the sheer bleakness of existence for most people most of the time. Faith anesthetized. It made the otherwise unbearable bearable. It taught people to accept things as they are because that is the will of God. Religion, he argued, was the most powerful means ever devised of keeping people in their place. It spread the aura of inevitability over arbitrary fate. So, argued Marx, if the world is to be changed, religion must be abandoned.
Nothing could be less true of Judaism – the faith born when God liberated a people from the chains of slavery. The question that echoes through the history of Judaism – from Abraham to Jeremiah to Job to rabbinic midrash to medieval lament to hasidic prayer – is not acceptance of, but a protest against, injustice. There are some questions to which the response is an answer. But there are other questions to which the response is an act. To ask, “Why do the righteous suffer?” is not to seek an explanation that will reconcile us to the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. It is to turn to God with a request for action, and to discover, in the very process of making the request, that God is asking the same of us.
There are three scenes in Moses’ early life. He sees an Egyptian attacking an Israelite, and he intervenes. He sees two Israelites fighting, and he intervenes. He sees non-Israelite shepherds mistreating the non-Israelite daughters of Yitro, and he intervenes. To be a Jew is to be prepared to act in the face of wrongdoing. When Rabbi Chaim of Brisk was asked, “What is the role of a rabbi?” he replied, “To redress the grievances of those who are abandoned and alone, to protect the dignity of the poor, and to save the oppressed from the hands of their oppressor.” Judaism is God’s question mark against the random cruelties of the world. It is His call to us to “mend the world” until it becomes a place worthy of the Divine Presence, to accept no illness that can be cured, no poverty that can be alleviated, no injustice that can be rectified. To ask the prophetic question is not to seek an answer but to be energized to action. That is what it is to meet God in <i>redemption</i>.
The three types of question are therefore interrelated. When we use our understanding of creation in conjunction with the commands of revelation, we help to bring redemption – an act at a time, a day at a time, knowing that it is not given to us to complete the task, but nor may we stand aside from it.
There are three conditions, though, for asking a Jewish question. The first is that we seek genuinely to learn – not to doubt, ridicule, dismiss, reject. That is what the wicked son of the Haggada does: he asks not out of a desire to understand but as a prelude to walking away.
Second is that we accept limits to our understanding. Not everything is intelligible at any given moment. There were scientists at the beginning of the twentieth century who believed that virtually every major discovery had already been made – not suspecting that the next hundred years would give rise to Einstein’s relativity theory, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, Gödel’s theorem, proof of the big bang origin of the universe, the discovery of DNA, and the decoding of the human genome. In relation to Torah, many German and American Jews in the nineteenth century could not understand Jewish prayers for a return to Zion, and deleted them from the prayer book. These facts should induce in us a certain humility. Not every scientific orthodoxy survives the test of time. Not everything in Judaism that we do not understand is unintelligible. The very features of Jewish life one generation finds difficult, the next generation may find the most meaningful of all. Faith is not opposed to questions, but it is opposed to the shallow certainty that what we understand is all there is.
Third is that when it comes to Torah, we learn by living and understand by doing. We learn to understand music by listening to music. We learn to appreciate literature by reading literature. There is no way of understanding Shabbat without keeping Shabbat, no way of appreciating how Jewish laws of family purity enhance a marriage without observing them. Judaism, like music, is something that can be understood only from the inside, by immersing yourself in it.
Given these caveats, Judaism is a faith that, more than any other, values the mind, encouraging questions and engaging us at the highest level of intellectual rigor. Every question asked in reverence is the start of a journey toward God, and it begins with the habit that, on Pesaḥ, Jewish parents teach their children: to ask, thereby to join the never-ending dialogue between human understanding and heaven.

The Wicked Son What Does He Say?

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>The wicked son – what does he say? “What is this service to you?” “To you,” he says, not to him. When he sets himself apart from the community, he denies the very core of our beliefs. And you must set his teeth on edge and tell him, “Because of this the Lord acted for me when I came out of Egypt.” “For me,” and not for him; had he been there he would not have been redeemed</i>. (Haggada)</small></span>
The section of the Haggada that speaks of the “four sons” is a brilliant example of the subtlety and creativity of rabbinic interpretation. It is based on the fact that in four places in the Torah (three in Ex. 12–13, one in Deut. 6), reference is made to parents’ instructing their children on the meaning of Jewish practice by relating it to the Exodus. True to their conviction that no word in the Torah was superfluous, the sages did not see these passages as mere repetition. Each teaches something new. Passionate about education and ultra-sensitive to nuances in the biblical text, the rabbis sensed that the four verses were about different kinds of children. Three included questions, but were of varying levels of sophistication and therefore signaled children of different temperaments and abilities. The fourth, which made no reference to a question, must refer to the child who has not yet reached the stage of asking. The passage as it stands testifies to the centrality of education in Jewish life, and especially to the role of parents as teachers.
From the evidence of parallel passages in the rabbinic literature, it seems likely that the text as it appears in the Haggada was the result of several centuries of debate and a long process of editing. There exist, in writings from the mishnaic period and also from the Jerusalem Talmud, sources that read like early drafts on which the Haggada text was based. Of great interest, though, is the fact that in two sources we find reference not to the “four sons” but to the wicked son alone:
<span class="poetry indentAll">“And if your children should ask” [Ex. 12:26] – [This implies that] in the future, some may say, “What does this service mean to you?” One who says, “to you,” is a wicked person who sets himself apart from the community. [In reply] you too should set him apart from the community by saying, “Because of what God did for me” – meaning “He did this for me – not for you.” (<i>Mekhilta deRabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai</i>)</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">“And you shall tell your child on that day, ‘It is because of what the Lord did for me’” [Ex. 13:8] – Why does it say this [and not “because of what the Lord did for us”]? Because it says earlier, “What does this service mean to you?” This refers to a wicked son who sets himself apart from the community – and because he sets himself apart, so too should you set him apart [by saying], “It is because of what the Lord did for me when I went out of Egypt” – “for me,” not “for you,” [implying] “had you been there you would not have been redeemed.” (<i>Mekhilta deRabbi Yishmael</i>)</span>
Rabbi Yishmael ben Elisha and Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai, from whose schools these teachings come, lived in the second century ce, through one of Judaism’s most turbulent and tragic eras. They witnessed the ferocity of Rome in suppressing Jewish life. They saw Jews defect from Judaism – some to ally themselves with Rome itself, others to join the new Christian sect. Rabbi Yishmael and Rabbi Shimon were different personality types, the former a rationalist, the latter a mystic, but they were both intensely loyal to Jewish identity and destiny and shared a sense of distress, verging on anger, at Jews who left the fold. We can now place their comments on the wicked son in a specific historical context. It was not Pesaḥ as such, nor were they speaking about young children. They were talking about Jews who, seeing the fall of Jerusalem and the rise of Rome, changed sides and allied themselves to forces that were in the ascendant. This was, for the rabbis, a kind of betrayal.
Another midrash gives us an idea of what defecting Jews argued. As always with rabbinic interpretation, we have to realize that when they spoke about their own time, they did so obliquely, by commenting on earlier times, in this case the Babylonian exile in the days of the prophet Ezekiel:
<span class="poetry indentAll">So you find that Israel sought to free itself from the yoke of its oath in the days of Ezekiel. Men from among the elders of Israel came “to seek the Lord” [Ezek. 20:1]. They said to him [Ezekiel], If a slave is purchased by a priest, may he eat <i>teruma</i> [food set aside for priests]? He replied, He may. Then they asked, If the priest sold him back again to an Israelite, has he left the priest’s domain? He said to them, He has. Then they said [to Ezekiel], So it is with us. We have left [God’s] domain and we shall become like the heathen nations. (Tanḥuma,<i> Nitzavim</i> 3)</span>
The argument (it was restated by Spinoza in the seventeenth century when he abandoned Judaism) is that God’s covenant with the people of Israel was conditional on their independence. God was their sovereign, precisely because they were not ruled over by anyone else. Therefore, when they went into exile – in the time of the Babylonian conquest and again in the days of Rome – they lost their independence and became subjects of another king. God could have no further claim on them. He had sold or abandoned them to another power. The covenant was at an end.
This is, it should be said, a powerful case, not to be dismissed lightly. It tells us how profound the crisis was when Jews came under foreign rule. The very survival of Jews and Judaism depended on rejecting this argument, but that took immense religious courage and determination. Writing in the fourth century from a Christian perspective, Augustine cannot restrain himself from a note of astonishment at the tenacity of Jewish faith: “It is in truth a surprising fact that the Jewish people never gave up its laws, either under the rule of pagan kings or under the dominion of Christians. In this respect it is different from other tribes and nations; no emperor or king who found them in his land was able to prevent Jews from being differentiated, by their observance of their Law, from the rest of the family of nations.” The persistence of Judaism depended on a leap of faith: that despite everything, the covenant was still in force. God had not abandoned His people and would one day redeem them. It should be added that Augustine was right: no other people in history demonstrated so tenacious a loyalty to its past and future. Virtually without exception, every other people that had been conquered adopted the culture of its conquerors.
The Roman era was not the first time, nor was it to be the last, when the very future of Judaism lay in the balance. It had happened before under Babylon, and again in the days of the Greeks. It happened again in fifteenth-century Spain, when Jews came under almost unbearable pressure to convert to Christianity. There is an astonishing admission by one of the outstanding figures of the Middle Ages, Don Isaac Abrabanel, as to the depth of despair he felt at the time of the Spanish expulsion. At one point, he writes, he felt like saying: “all the prophets who prophesied about my redemption and salvation are all false…Moses, may he rest in peace, was false in his utterances, Isaiah lied in his consolations, Jeremiah and Ezekiel lied in their prophecies” (<i>Zevaḥ Pesaḥ</i>). Nor was he alone. “Let the people remember,” he adds, “all the despairing things they used to say” in the days of 1492.
Yet Abrabanel, like Rabbis Yishmael and Shimon bar Yoḥai thirteen centuries earlier, was convinced that defection, conversion, or assimilation were wrong. Not only were they the ultimate betrayal of the covenant of Jewish identity; they would not even succeed in sparing Jews from anti-Semitism:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Many of our brethren have forsaken the religion of their forefathers as a result of persecution, and wished to be like the nations of the world, thinking that thereby they would remove from themselves the providence of God and the duty of keeping His Torah, and would prosper in their works just like other nations and would no longer belong to the body of their people. But [they are mistaken, because] though they and their descendants would do all in their power to assimilate, they would not succeed. They would still be called Jews against their own will, and would be accused of Judaizing in secret and be burnt at the stake for it.</span>
Three hundred and seventy years later, in 1862, Moses Hess wrote in almost identical terms about the German Jews of his time: “Because of the Jew-hatred that surrounds him, the German Jew is only too eager to cast aside everything Jewish and deny his race” (<i>Rome and Jerusalem</i>). This too, says Hess, will fail: “Even baptism itself,” he writes, will “not save him from the nightmare of German Jew-hatred.” Tragically, history proved both Abrabanel and Hess right.
Behind the simple paragraph about the wicked son is a long and painful history of Jews who, faced with persecution on the one hand and the blandishments of the ruling power on the other, chose to abandon Judaism. Viewing this history it is hard not to feel the irony of the fact that ancient Greece and Rome, two civilizations that prided themselves on their tolerance, and medieval Christianity, which claimed to worship the God of love, showed surprisingly little tolerance and love when it came to Jews. Their principle often seemed to be that Jews were to be tolerated and loved, <i>provided</i> that they relinquished their Judaism. There can, however, equally be no doubt – it is reflected in the harshness of the reply to the wicked son – that Jews themselves felt betrayed by those of their number who, at times of crisis, went over to the other side, to the persecuting power.
That is the history behind the wicked son. Nowadays, however, the situation is somewhat different. Throughout the Diaspora, Jews are again assimilating and outmarrying. As in the days of Rome and Spain the Jewish people faces a crisis of continuity. This time, however, the cause is not persecution but something else: indifference, perhaps, or ignorance, or the sheer pressure of an age and culture in which long-term commitments are becoming rarer and harder to understand. Each age brings its own challenges, and because ours is new, I am inclined to offer a radical reinterpretation of the passage “The wicked son – what does he say?”
I do so for the following reasons. First: has any Jewish parent ever truly believed that his or her son is “wicked”? The Torah contains a law about “a stubborn and rebellious son” (Deut. 21:18), brought to court by his parents for punishment. The Talmud records the statement by one of Israel’s sages that “there never was nor ever will be a stubborn and rebellious son” (<i>Sanhedrin</i> 71a). To be a parent is to have compassion for one’s child. The Hebrew word for compassion, <i>raḥamim</i>, comes from the word <i>reḥem</i>, “womb.” No parent can write off a child as irretrievably wicked. That is why, when we plead for God’s forgiveness, we call Him <i>Avinu</i>, “our parent.”
Second: is the dismissive response – “set his teeth on edge” – the best way of dealing with a rebellious child? The biblical Jacob did not rebuke his children Reuben, Simeon, and Levi until he was on his deathbed. According to tradition, he reasoned, “If I rebuke them during my lifetime, they will leave me and go to my brother, Esau.” When, in the early twentieth century, a distressed father wrote to Rav Kook about how he should treat his son who had abandoned Judaism, Rav Kook replied, “If you loved him before, love him even more now.”
Third (a rabbinic objection, this): how <i>old</i> is the wicked son? Either he is older than Bar Mitzva age (thirteen) or younger. If he is younger, then his question is correct, not dismissive: “What is this service <i>to you</i>?” which might well mean, “I, who have not yet reached the age of commandedness, do not know what it means to be commanded. You, however, do. Please, therefore, explain it to me.” If, however, he has reached the age of thirteen, then Jewish law states, “One who chastises his adult son is to be excommunicated, for he has transgressed the prohibition of ‘placing a stumbling block before the blind’ [Lev. 19:14]” (Rambam, <i>Hilkhot Mamrim</i> 6:9). Among the proscriptions included in the rule of the “stumbling block” is provoking someone to sin. A child over the age of thirteen who strikes his parent is guilty of a major offense. Therefore a parent is forbidden to provoke such a child by acting in a way that may give rise to retaliation.
Fourth: why does the Haggada use the strange phrase “set his teeth on edge”? Classical Hebrew contains many words meaning instruction, chastisement, correction, remonstration, and reproof. The Haggada is a rabbinic document, and the rabbis tended to prefer plain speaking to circumlocutory metaphors. Why, therefore, “set his teeth on edge” instead of the plain “rebuke”?
The last question provides the clue. The phrase “set his teeth on edge” is in fact a biblical allusion. It is cited by two prophets, Jeremiah and Ezekiel, as a well-known proverb: “The fathers have eaten sour grapes and the children’s teeth are set on edge” (Jer. 31:28). By using this unusual locution the sages were hinting at something profound. Children do not always rebel of their own accord. The parent of a rebellious child should ask himself or herself: did I do something to cause it? Was it my “sour grapes” that set my child’s “teeth on edge”? Taking this as a key to the whole passage, I suggest the following reinterpretation:
What is the child whom others see as wicked – the adolescent, the rebel, the breakaway – really signaling by his conduct? We know what he says. But what is the question <i>beneath</i> the words, the inarticulate cry? “Father, Mother, what does Judaism mean <i>to you</i>? You sent me to Hebrew school. You gave me a Bar Mitzva. You hired teachers for me. I know what Judaism is supposed to mean. I listened to the lessons. I read the books. But all the time I was growing up, you sent me mixed messages. When I neglected my secular education, you were angry, but when I missed Hebrew lessons, you never seemed to mind. I learned about the laws of Jewish life, but you did not seem to observe them, or if you did, you did so selectively. You <i>said</i> Judaism mattered, but what you <i>did</i> seemed to show that it did not matter very much. At my Bar Mitzva, you were more concerned about the catering than about how much I understood of the words I said in synagogue. As I grew older, you seemed more interested in which college I went to and which career I pursued than whether I was continuing to study and practice Judaism. You wanted me to marry a Jewish girl, but you never gave me a real reason why. I know what Judaism is supposed to mean to me – but you are my parents. I am Jewish only because you are. So I ask you from the depth of my soul: what does Judaism mean <i>to you</i>?”
This is a deep question and it brooks no evasion. The only answer one can give – the existential response that alone is capable of reaching from soul to soul – is to say what Judaism means <i>to me</i> – not to him. We must <i>own</i> Judaism before we can pass it on. We must live it if we are to inspire those who will live on after us. The Torah says, “Love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul and with all your might…. Teach them repeatedly to your children” (Deut. 6:5). Rabbi Moses Alshekh, explaining the connection, said simply: we can teach our children only what we ourselves love.
What prompts such honesty? The knowledge that without it, “Had he been there, he would not have been redeemed.” No parent can leave a child unredeemed. Therefore to be a parent is to be willing to take one’s child and walk, hand in hand, partway on the Jewish journey, showing that we are prepared to live by the faith we want him or her to continue. On this reading, the “wicked son” is not wicked, merely confused, and it is we, his parents, who have confused him. To end his confusion we must first end ours by asking, in the depths of self-knowledge, what Judaism means to us.

Begin with Shame, End with Praise

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>[When telling the story of the Exodus] begin with shame and end with praise.</i> (Mishna <i>Pesaḥim</i> 10:4)</small></span>
If you want to understand a people, listen to the way it tells its stories. In the literature of humanity there are many kinds of stories. Some – we know them from childhood – end with the words, “And they all lived happily ever after.” We call them fairy tales, fantasies, myths. In the artificial reality they conjure up, the evil dragon is slain, the wicked witch defeated, the curse lifted, the conflict resolved. Judaism has no such stories because it does not believe in myth. In the Jewish narrative, the battle against evil is never complete. The messianic age has not yet come. Until then we live in a universe in which, though there is liberation from Egypt, after Pharaoh comes Amalek, and after Amalek, other tyrants. Injustice must be fought in every generation. The legacy of the Exodus is not a world in which “they all lived happily ever after.” There is no closure, no “sense of an ending.” Instead there is something more real and at the same time more radical: Shabbat – a world of rest that is temporary but no less utopian, where one day in seven we experience pure, unmediated freedom and gain the strength to continue the journey, to take up the struggle.
Beyond myth, there is a second great literary genre that we owe to the Greeks, namely <i>tragedy</i>. Tragedy tells the story of human beings, with their aspirations and ambitions, in a world governed by impersonal forces. To be human is to wish, to plan, to dream. But our dreams are destined to crash against the rocks of a reality fundamentally indifferent to our existence. They are <i>hubris</i>, and are always punished by <i>nemesis</i>. Oedipus and the other great figures of Greek drama fail to defeat the forces of fate, as they were bound to do. Tragedy is the consequence of a vision of the sheer abyss between humanity and the gods. Zeus, like other ancient deities, had no special affection for human beings. They disturbed his peace. They threatened to steal his secret knowledge. The gods of polytheistic cultures tended to be at best mildly irritated by, at worst actively hostile to human beings. A tragic universe is a place where bad things happen for no particular reason; where there is no ultimate justice and no expectation of it; where we learn to accept, with Stoic courage, the random cruelties of circumstance. As Aristotle put it, a tragic hero is one whose fortunes change “from happiness to misery; and the cause of it must lie not in any depravity, but in some great error on his part” (<i>Poetics</i>). Or as Jean Anouilh wrote:
<span class="poetry indentAll">In tragedy nothing is in doubt and everyone’s destiny is known. That makes for tranquility. There is a sort of fellow-feeling among characters in a tragedy: he who kills is as innocent as he who gets killed: it’s all a matter of what part you are playing. Tragedy is restful; and the reason is that hope, that foul, deceitful thing, has no part in it. (<i>Antigone</i>)</span>
There is – there can be – no tragedy in Judaism. That is not because there are no disasters, crises, catastrophes. Manifestly there are. Jewish history, as often as not, has been written in tears. Nor is it because in a Jewish story there is always a happy ending. That, to repeat, is the structure of myth, not Judaism. But there is always hope, grounded hope, justified not by optimism, innocence, or a “Whiggish theory” that sees history as constant progress, but by the terms of the covenant between heaven and earth. <i>Judaism is the principled rejection of tragedy in the name of hope</i>.
In the lexicon of civilization, there are deep commonalities but no less profound differences. Every culture makes music but only some produce symphonies. Every people tells stories but not all create novels, let alone those of Dickens or Tolstoy. Each individual has memories but only in certain ages and societies do they write autobiographies. Every map of the human condition must find a place for emotion, but not every culture generates, or even finds meaningful, the emotion called hope. In the West, we tend to take it for granted as if it were a universal phenomenon. It is not. It has deep conceptual preconditions that are, if anything, exceptional rather than normal. What must we believe if we are to hope?
Hope is born when people first come to believe the following: that there is an author of the universe; that He is not merely the first cause, prime mover, initiator of the big bang, but that He is actively involved in history; that He is personal, meaning one who understands us; that He brought the world into existence not out of mere curiosity or for some reason unfathomable to us, but out of love, as a parent gives birth to a child; that, despite the chasm between God and us, the infinite and the miniscule, the eternal and the fleeting, there is communication, God speaks; that God binds Himself to the same rules of ethics He gives to us; and that therefore, having given His word, He will not fail to honor it. These are massive beliefs. They constitute the metaphysics of Judaism and have left their trace on its daughter monotheisms, Christianity and Islam. But without them, there is no hope, and with them, though there may be misery, injustice, and pain, there is no tragedy in the Greek sense, for tragedy means the absence of hope.
“Begin with shame and end with praise” – in this quintessentially anti-tragic formula the rabbis specified how the Pesaḥ story should be told. They disagreed on details. According to some, the narration should be along the lines of the reply to the wise son in the Book of Deuteronomy (6:21), “We were slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt, and the Lord our God brought us out.” According to others it should echo Joshua’s final address to the Israelites, “Long ago your ancestors – Terah, the father of Abraham and Nahor – lived on the other side of the Euphrates and worshipped other gods” (Josh. 24:2). I explain in my commentary what is at stake between these two views; and in fact, we do both. However, all agree that in telling the story we must start with the bad news (slavery, idolatry) and end with the good (liberation, revelation). In this simple rule, the rabbis were doing more than outlining the form of the Haggada narrative. They were summarizing the structure of the Jewish imagination. A nation’s emotional tonality is expressed in how it tells its story.
The Book of Genesis, for example, is dominated by sibling rivalry, but it ends on a note of reconciliation between Joseph and his brothers (“You intended evil against me, but God turned it into good” [Gen. 50:20]). The land promised to the patriarchs is still not theirs. Genesis comes to a close with their descendants in Egypt. But again there is a chord of expectation. Joseph says, “I am about to die, but God will surely come to your aid and take you up out of this land to the land He promised on oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob” (Gen. 50:24). The Mosaic books close with Moses forbidden to enter the land to which he had led his people for forty years, but God leads him up the mountain so he can see it from afar. The Hebrew Bible as a whole ends (II Chr. 36) with Cyrus, king of Persia, giving permission to the Jews to return to Israel and rebuild the Temple. There is no closure to these endings, no guarantee of what will happen next. But there is a confidence, born of covenant, whose name is hope. There will be difficulties ahead, but they will not be insurmountable. There will be grief, but it will not be paralyzing or final. Terrible suffering may lie in wait around the corner, but something and someone will survive. There may be exile but eventually there will be homecoming, return. Defeat is never ultimate, nor do we face the uncertain future alone. “Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for You are with me” (Ps. 23:4). Wherever we are, there is a way back to the Promised Land, the good society, the destination that lies beyond our field of vision but that we know is there.
There is nothing in the empirical character of the events themselves that dictates this way, rather than that, of telling the story. <i>History does not give rise to hope; hope gives rise to history</i>. As the philosopher-critic Ernst Cassirer put it, the “meaning of historical time is built not solely from recollection of the past, but no less from anticipation of the future. It depends as much on the striving as on the act, as much on the tendency toward the future as on the contemplation and actualization of the past” (<i>Philosophy of Symbolic Forms</i>). The Hebrew Bible narrates history the way it does because it sees the relationship between God and man the way it does. We can see this by a simple thought experiment.
Imagine the Hebrew Bible rewritten as Greek tragedy. The same events might be recounted, but the division of books would be different. The Book of Genesis would run on into the first chapters of Exodus, with the hopes of Abraham and his children dashed in the face of slavery. The Mosaic books would come to an end not with Deuteronomy but with Joshua and Judges and its closing verse, heavy with disillusionment and the sense of chaos: “In those days there was no king in Israel; each person did what was right in his own eyes” (Judges 21:25). The Bible as a whole might have ended with the Babylonian exile and the Book of Lamentations. The difference between hope and tragedy lies not in what happens but in how we interpret and respond to it. The moral imagination is shaped not only by events but also, and even primarily, by how we recount them; where we begin and end; how we frame our telling, structuring the narrative.
The Pesaḥ story – “Begin with shame and end with praise” – is the archetype of the Jewish reading of history, its insistence on rescuing a thread of meaning from catastrophe, its refusal, at times heroic, to be demoralized by defeat, to give in to the siren call of despair. It is the rejection of myth and tragedy, optimism and pessimism alike. The Jewish narrative does not ask us to believe in a world in which there are simple happy endings. Nor does it allow us to take refuge in the cynical belief that every aspiration ends in failure (it is worth remembering that the first “cynics,” from whom we get the word, were Greek philosophers). Anouilh was right: tragedy is restful; Judaism is restless. There is nothing peaceful about hope. Far simpler to believe nothing, expect nothing, reconcile oneself to the meaninglessness of a universe endlessly revolving in silence around a void, and therefore accept the inevitability of fate. Far harder to strive for justice against oppression, freedom against tyranny, knowing that even victory is never final before the end of days and that until then we must fight the battle in every generation, just as the story of the Exodus must be told every year. Yet to be a Jew is to choose what Levinas calls “difficult liberty” over easy necessity. Israel, says the Torah, is the people whose name means “one who struggles with God and with man and who prevails” (Gen. 32:28). Far from being simple or naive, hope demands, creates, and expresses indomitable moral courage.
Viktor Frankl was a Jew who survived Auschwitz and, on the basis of his experiences, founded a school of psychiatry he called logotherapy. Survival, he argued, whether in the concentration camps or through trauma, grief, depression, and loss, is a matter of “man’s search for meaning.” If we can find meaning in our suffering, we can emerge, if not physically, then at least psychologically, intact. There was, he discovered, one freedom left in Auschwitz, when every other vestige of liberty and humanity had been destroyed:
<span class="poetry indentAll">We who lived in concentration camps can remember the men who walked through the huts comforting others, giving away their last piece of bread. They may have been few in number, but they offer sufficient proof that everything can be taken from a man but one thing: the last of the human freedoms – to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s own way. (<i>Man’s Search for Meaning</i>)</span>
I am awestruck at the courage of successive generations of Jews, survivors of the Crusades, blood libels, inquisitions, expulsions, ghettos, and pogroms, who wrestled with God in prayer and lamentation, who did not accept their fate passively or silently, giving way either to blind submission (“such is the will of God”) or to a bleak, Greek view of fate, but who continued – in the fine phrase of Nadezhda Mandelstam – to “hope against hope.” Jews are not blind to the existence of evil. We feel it, taste it, each year afresh, in the bread of oppression and the bitter herbs of slavery. But we refuse with every fiber of our being to be resigned to it. To understand the Jewish people, one must listen to the way it tells its story. A people whose narrative “begins with shame and ends with praise” is one that, knowing in its bones the reality of evil, did not cease wrestling with the angel of death until it discovered the path from suffering to hope.

Ben Zoma and the Sages

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria said: I am almost seventy years old, and never have I merited to find the command to speak of the Exodus from Egypt at night – until Ben Zoma interpreted: It is written, [Deut. 16:3] “So that you remember the day of your exodus from Egypt all the days of your life.” The days of your life would mean “in the days”; all the days of your life includes the nights. But the sages say: The days of your life would mean only “in this world”; all the days of your life brings in the time of the Messiah</i>. (Haggada)</small></span>
This passage, though it forms part of the Haggada, is not concerned with Pesaḥ. It was almost certainly added to the Haggada because of its connection with the previous paragraph, in which Rabbi Elazar ben Azaria figured prominently (see “The Sages in Benei Brak,” earlier in this book). It is, in fact, part of the mishna (<i>Berakhot</i> 1:5) that deals with the daily evening prayer.
It is not only on Pesaḥ that we recall the Exodus. The Torah states, “so that you remember the day of your exodus from Egypt all the days of your life,” and from this the sages derived that the Exodus is to be mentioned – though not expounded at length – every day. This is done by reciting the third paragraph of the <i>Shema</i> (which includes “I am the Lord your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt”) and the subsequent blessing before the <i>Amida</i>. The question arose as to whether this should be done in the evening service as well. Some communities in mishnaic times did; some did not. The predominant custom – universal today – was to do so. The Mishna explains the logic of the two views.
Rabbi Elazar says that though he is (lit.) “like a man of seventy” he was unable to find a justification for the common practice until Ben Zoma explained it to him. The basis of Ben Zoma’s view is the principle, generally accepted by the sages, that the Torah contains no superfluous word. Every apparent redundancy has a purpose. It serves as the basis of a law that we could not have established otherwise. In the present case, the Torah could have said, “the days of your life.” The addition of the word “all” was to teach that we must recall the Exodus not only every day, but also every night. The sages agreed with Ben Zoma that the word “all” was significant. They held, though, that it came to teach a law not about nights, but about the messianic age.
It follows that Ben Zoma and the sages did not disagree only about the structure of the evening prayers. They also disagreed about the future – the character of the messianic age. All agreed that in messianic times there would be a second exodus. Just as God had redeemed the Israelites from Egypt, so in the future He would gather them from the countries of their dispersion and bring them back to the land of Israel. So the prophets had foretold, and so all Jews believed. That was not at issue. The question was whether the future redemption would eclipse memories of the past. Would we still mention the Exodus from Egypt in the messianic age?
The Haggada quotes only the first stage of the debate. The continuation is reported in the Talmud:
<span class="poetry indentAll">Ben Zoma said to the sages: Will the Exodus from Egypt be mentioned in the messianic age? Was it not long ago said, “Behold, the days are coming, says the Lord, when they shall no more say: ‘As the Lord lives, who brought the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt’; but ‘As the Lord lives, who brought up and led the children of the house of Israel out of the land of the north and from all the countries where I have driven them’” [Jer. 23:7–8]?</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">The sages replied: This does not mean that the mention of the Exodus from Egypt will be discontinued. Rather, the deliverance from the other kingdoms will be primary and the Exodus from Egypt will be secondary. (<i>Berakhot</i> 12b)</span>
Jeremiah had prophesied that the future redemption would be more remarkable even than the Exodus that took place in the days of Moses. This was agreed by both parties to the debate. The one question over which they divided was whether it would <i>eclipse</i> memories of Egypt or merely demote them to second place. Such was the debate in the first half of the second century ce.
There are rare moments when one is privileged to see a prophecy come true. It happened at the beginning of the Gulf War in January 1991. I was in Israel with our family during the whole of the confrontation. In its early stages an Anglo-Jewish solidarity mission came to Israel, and I was asked to address the participants on the significance of the events through which we were living. We met on Friday night, on the Shabbat when we read the Torah portion of <i>Beshalah</i> (Ex. 13:17 onward), which begins with the departure of the Israelites from Egypt.
I quoted the mishnaic and talmudic passages about the argument between Ben Zoma and the sages, explaining that all agreed that the future redemption, when God would gather Jews “out of the land of the north and from all the countries where He has driven them” (Jer. 16:15) and bring them back to Israel, would be yet more remarkable than the Exodus from Egypt. How, I asked, could this be so? The biblical Exodus had been accompanied by signs and wonders, miracles the like of which had long ceased. What could be more wondrous than those days?
I then quoted the opening verse of that week’s portion: “When Pharaoh let the people go, God did not lead them by way of the land of the Philistines, which was near, for He said: ‘The people may change their minds when they see battle, and return to Egypt’” (Ex. 13:17). The meaning of the verse was clear. Even though the Israelites were fleeing slavery, and though they had witnessed miracles, God was concerned that if they were to face war, they would turn around and go back.
I then said to the mission: You have just witnessed something more remarkable still. You will have noticed, on your arrival, that Ben-Gurion Airport was almost empty [during the war, commercial flights ceased and all the airlines closed their desks; the airport was in direct danger of attack from Iraqi Scud missiles]. Only one service has continued to operate on a regular basis without interruption – the flights bringing Russian <i>olim</i>, new immigrants, to Israel; perhaps the only time in history that a country has been under missile attack and yet people have continued to travel there, seeking to make it their home. In the days of Moses, when the Israelites left Egypt, God feared that if they saw war they would return. <i>Today the Russian Jews have seen war and still they continue to come.</i> This week we have seen with our own eyes the fulfillment of Jeremiah’s prophecy that one day there will be an ingathering of exiles in some respects more miraculous than the Exodus from Egypt.
Despite the grief and pain of modern Jewish history, there have been moments – especially in relation to the State of Israel – that can only be compared with the wonders of the Bible. Perhaps we are too close to be able to see their miraculous character. One day, though, historians will look back at the second half of the twentieth century and wonder at how a people that in the Holocaust had come face to face with the angel of death responded by reviving a land, recovering its sovereignty, rebuilding Jerusalem, rescuing threatened Jews throughout the world, and proving itself as courageous in pursuit of peace as in defending itself in war. The echoes of exodus continue to reverberate through Jewish history, undiminished through time, as wondrous now as in those days long ago.

The First Pesah

Rashi is the greatest and best loved of all the commentators on the Torah. In the nineteenth chapter of Genesis, however, he makes a comment about Pesaḥ that seems to defy understanding. God has just sent three messengers – angels in human form – to Abraham. He greets them at the entrance to his tent, and he and Sarah offer them hospitality. They have come to tell Sarah that at long last she will have a child. After they leave, God tells Abraham that He is about to destroy Sodom and Gomorrah and the other cities of the plain. Theirs is an evil civilization, and the cry of their wrongdoing has reached heaven. Abraham protests on their behalf in one of the most powerful of all recorded dialogues between man and God: “Will You sweep away the righteous with the wicked?…Shall the Judge of all the earth not do justice?” (Gen. 18:23–25) God agrees that if there are even ten righteous people, He will not destroy the cities. Meanwhile, two of the messengers have gone to visit Lot, who has made his home in Sodom.
He greets them and offers them hospitality. They decline, but he insists. The next verse states: “He prepared a meal for them and baked unleavened bread [matzot] and they ate” (Gen. 19:3). What is the significance of the reference to unleavened bread? Abraham and Sarah had made “cakes” for their visitors (ibid. 18:6). By contrast, Lot makes matzot.
On this, Rashi makes his strange comment. In <i>Pesaḥ haya</i>, he writes: “It was Pesaḥ.”
What does Rashi mean? The actual Exodus lay more than two hundred years in the future. Abraham had already received the prophecy that “your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own” (Gen. 15:13), but Lot had not. Nor was Lot a prophet: that much is clear. He was unable to foresee even the immediate future, that within twenty-four hours his home and town would be destroyed. How could he have the foresight to know that the date of the angels’ visit was – or more precisely, would become – the festival of Pesaḥ? And why should he be observing its laws generations before it became a reality? Rashi’s comment is opaque, to say the least. I want to offer a novel interpretation.
The Torah states that early in their stay in the land of Canaan, Abraham and Lot became wealthy. Their flocks were so large that there was not enough grazing land for them both. There were intermittent quarrels between their herdsmen. Abraham, ever a man of peace, urged Lot to separate. “Let there be no quarrel between you and me, or between your herdsmen and mine, for we are brothers” (Gen. 13:18). He told Lot to choose whichever part of the country he preferred. Lot looked out over the plain of the Jordan Valley and saw that it was fertile, “like the garden of the Lord” (Gen. 13:10), and decided to live there. Characteristically, he is more moved by economic considerations than moral ones. The inhabitants are evil, but that does not discourage him. He decides to live in the region of Sodom. Abraham, meanwhile, keeps his distance. He is willing to fight battles for the people of the region (Gen. 14) and to pray on their behalf, but he seeks to preserve his way of life, the lonely path of loyalty to God.
What happens next is predictable and tragic. By the time the angels visit Lot he is “sitting in the gateway of the city” (Gen. 19:1). The city gate is where the elders sat in ancient times and, among other things, settled disputes. It was, in effect, a court of law. Rashi comments, “That day they [the inhabitants of Sodom] had appointed him a judge.” His daughters had married local men – the first case of outmarriage in the Torah. In contemporary terms, Lot had begun to assimilate.
The angels tell him that the time has come for him to leave. The city is about to be destroyed, and he is in great danger. He must gather his family and immediately depart. Lot hesitates. He goes to discuss the proposal with his sons-in-law. They laugh. At this point, with acute irony, the text states that “Lot was, in their eyes, like one making a joke” (Gen. 19:14). Surely, they said, he could not be serious. They dismiss him. The angels urge him again: “Hurry, or you will be swept away” (ibid. 19:15). Lot hesitates. There is a universe of significance in his hesitation.
Tradition has placed an unusual musical notation over the word “hesitated” in this passage; it is known as a <i>shalshelet</i>. The tune rises and falls, rises and falls, and seems unable to get on to the next word. The sixteenth-century commentator Rabbi Joseph ibn Caspi correctly observes that this cantillation is a musical way of signaling inner struggle, profound ambivalence. This is Lot’s state of mind at that moment. After a lifetime as a nomad, he has arrived. He has made his home in an affluent town and achieved social recognition. He has been appointed a judge. His daughters have found husbands within the local population. He has become, or so he believes, accepted as part of Sodom and he cannot bring himself to leave. Despite his visitors’ repeated warnings, he delays, risking his life and the lives of his family in the process. Why should he leave the peace and security he thinks he has found merely because two visiting strangers have issued an alarm?
Biblical narrative is immensely subtle, full of resonance to those able to decode its nuances. A few verses earlier, it provides an ironic countercommentary on Lot’s social ambitions. No sooner has word spread around town about Lot’s visitors than the inhabitants surround his house, demanding that he bring them out “that we may know them” (Gen. 19:5). Lot refuses, saying that honor demands that he protect his guests from harm. The people of Sodom reply, “Get out of our way…this fellow came here as an alien, and now he wants to play the judge! We’ll treat you worse than them” (ibid. 19:9). Despite the story Lot has told himself – that he is accepted, integrated, acculturated – he remains, in the eyes of the locals, an alien. In thinking he belongs, he is engaging in tragic self-deception.
This very sequence of events was repeated in Egypt, this time on a national scale. The Israelites had settled there and grown affluent. One of their ancestors, Joseph, had risen to greatness and become second-in-command to Pharaoh himself. To be sure, a new Pharaoh had ascended to the throne who “knew not Joseph” (Ex. 1:8) and had begun to afflict them, first conscripting them into forced labor, then carrying out a program of genocide, drowning male children in the Nile. But when Moses began the long task of liberation, the Israelites themselves complained. His interventions, they said, had only made things worse. “You have made us a stench to Pharaoh and his servants and have put a sword in their hand to kill us” (Ex. 5:21). They resented his attempts to rescue them.
Rabbi Joseph Soloveitchik made an insightful comment about the opening of the Book of Exodus. The first verse reads, “And these are the names of the children of Israel who were coming (<i>haba’im</i>) to Egypt.” The verse uses the present tense rather than the past. In fact the Israelites had come generations before, but in the eyes of the Egyptians it was as if they had just arrived. They remained immigrants, foreigners, outsiders. The new Pharaoh, announcing his program of persecution, justified it with the words, “When we are called to war they may join with our enemies [and] fight against us” (Ex. 1:10). In the eyes of the Egyptians, they were not citizens but aliens, just as the people of Sodom had seen Lot. The Israelites for their part – despite the deathbed reminders of Jacob and Joseph that they would return to the Promised Land and were not to stay indefinitely in Egypt – “acquired property there” (Gen. 47:27), implying that they intended to make Egypt their home. It was not easy for Moses to get them to leave. In the end they were “driven out” by the Egyptians (Ex. 12:39), just as Lot was physically dragged by the angels from Sodom (Gen. 19:16).
Sadly, this was often the fate of Jews. Facing danger, they were slow to see it – in Spain in the fifteenth century, in Europe in the twentieth. They had found a place where they prospered, and could not believe they were not regarded by their neighbors as fellow citizens. How could a country to which they had contributed so much turn against them? How could they, who had lived there for so long, not be accepted? This delay – the recurrence of Lot’s ambivalence – was fraught with risk. The people of history was sometimes deaf to the warning signals of history. This too, tragically, is part of the Pesaḥ story. Where did it begin? With Lot in Sodom. Rashi’s comment is profound: without knowing it, Lot was living through the first Pesaḥ.

The Unasked Question

Pesaḥ is a night of questions, but there is one we do not ask, and it is significant. Why was there a Pesaḥ in the first place? Why the years of suffering and slavery? Israel was redeemed. It regained its freedom. It returned to the land its ancestors had been promised centuries before. But why the necessity of exile? Why did God not arrange for Abraham or Isaac or Jacob simply to inherit the land of Canaan? If the Israelites had not gone down to Egypt in the days of Joseph, there would have been no suffering and no need for redemption. Why Pesaḥ?
The question is unavoidable, given the terms of the biblical narrative. The Torah indicates that there was nothing accidental about the events leading up to Pesaḥ. Centuries before, Abraham had been told by God in the Covenant between the Pieces, “Know for certain that your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own, and they will be enslaved and ill-treated for four hundred years” (Gen. 15:13). We make repeated reference in the course of the Haggada to the fact that the whole sequence of events was part of a preordained plan. God had already “calculated the end” of suffering. When Jacob went down to Egypt he was, we say, <i>anus al pi hadibbur</i>, “compelled by what had been spoken.” God himself told Jacob, “Do not be afraid to go down to Egypt, for I will make you into a great nation there” (Gen. 46:3), without intimating the sufferings his children would endure. The sages say that at the end of his life, when Jacob wanted to tell his children what would happen to them at the end of days, the gift of prophecy was taken from him. Without knowing it, the Israelites were part of a narrative that had been scripted long before.
A midrash – one of the few places in which the sages expressed their disquiet about this strange stratagem of Providence – expresses the problem very acutely:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The Holy One, blessed be He, sought to bring about the decree He had spoken of to Abraham, that “your descendants will be strangers in a country not their own.” So He arranged that Jacob should love Joseph more than his other sons, that the brothers would be jealous and hate Joseph, that they would sell him to the Ishmaelites, who would bring him down to Egypt, and that Jacob would hear that Joseph was still alive and living there. The result was that Jacob and the tribes went to Egypt and became enslaved. Rabbi Tanḥuma said: To what can this be compared? To a herdsman who wishes to place the yoke on a cow, but the cow refuses to have it placed on her. What does the herdsman do? He takes a calf from the cow and leads it to the field where plowing is to take place. The calf begins to cry for its mother. The cow, hearing the calf cry, rushes to the field, and there, while its attention is distracted and it is thinking only of its young, the yoke is placed upon it. (Tanḥuma,<i> Vayeshev</i> 4)</span>
The script God writes for His people is sometimes circuitous and terrifying. The sages applied to it the pointed phrase “How awesome is God in His dealings with mankind” (Ps. 66:5). Why did He want His people to experience slavery? Why was exile in Egypt the necessary prelude to their life as a sovereign nation in the Promised Land?
The Book of Jonah tells a strange story. Jonah has been asked by God to warn the people of Nineveh. Their ways are corrupt; the city will be destroyed unless they repent. Jonah flees from his mission, and in the course of the book we learn why. He knew, he says, that the people of Nineveh, hearing the words of the prophet, would repent and be forgiven. For Jonah, this was unjust. When people do wrong, they should suffer the consequences and be punished. This was particularly so in the case of Nineveh, a city of the Assyrians, who were to cause Israel so much suffering. God’s forgiveness conflicted with Jonah’s sense of retributive justice. God decides to teach Jonah a moral lesson. He sends him a gourd to give him shade from the burning sun. The next day He sends a worm that makes the gourd wither and die. Jonah is plunged into suicidal depression. God then says to him: “You cared about that plant, which you did not toil for and did not grow, which appeared overnight and was lost overnight. And Nineveh has more than a hundred and twenty thousand people in it – who do not know their right hands from their left – and many animals. Am I not to care for that great city?” (4:10–11).
God teaches Jonah to care by giving him something and then taking it away. Loss teaches us to value things, though usually too late. <i>What we have, and then lose, we do not take for granted</i>. The religious vision is not about seeing things that are not there. It is about seeing the things that are there and always were, but that we never noticed, or paid attention to. <i>Faith is a form of attention. It is a sustained meditation on the miraculousness of what is, because it might not have been.</i> What we lose and are given back, we learn to cherish in a way we would not have done had we never lost it in the first place. Faith is about not taking things for granted.
This is the key to understanding a whole series of narratives in the Book of Genesis. Sarah, Rebecca, and Rachel long to have children but discover they are infertile. Only through God’s intervention are they able to conceive. Abraham goes through the trial of the binding of Isaac, only to discover that God, who has asked him to sacrifice his child, says, “Stop!” at the last moment. This is how the covenantal family learns that having children is not something that merely happens. It is how the people of Israel learned, at the dawn of their history, <i>never to take children for granted</i>. Jewish continuity, the raising of new generations of Jews, is not natural, inevitable, a process that takes care of itself. It needs constant effort and attention. The same is true of freedom.
Freedom in the biblical sense – responsible self-restraint – is not natural. To the contrary, the natural order in human societies, as in the animal kingdom, is that the strong prey on and dominate the weak. Nothing is rarer or harder to achieve than a society of equal dignity for all. Merely to conceive it requires a massive disengagement from nature. The Torah tells us how this was achieved, through the historical experience of a people who would ever afterward be the carriers of God’s message to mankind.
<i>Israel had to lose its freedom before it could cherish it</i>. Only what we lose do we fully pay attention to. Israel had to suffer the experience of slavery and degradation before it could learn, know, and feel intuitively that there is something morally wrong with oppression. Nor could it, or any other people, carry this message in perpetuity without reliving it every year, tasting the harsh tang of the bread of oppression and the bitterness of slavery. Thus was created, at the birth of the nation, a longing for freedom that was at the very core of its memory and identity.
Had Israel achieved immediate nationhood in the patriarchal age without the experience of exile and persecution, it would – like so many other nations in history – have taken freedom for granted; and when freedom is taken for granted, it has already begun to be lost. Israel became the people conceived in slavery so that it would never cease to long for liberty – and know that liberty is anything but natural. It requires constant vigilance, unceasing moral struggle. Israel discovered freedom by losing it. May it never lose it again.

One Little Goat

<span class="poetry indentAll"><small><i>One little goat, one little goat my father bought for two zuzim.</i> (Haggada)</small></span>
This strange and haunting song, like many other elements of the seder, is simple on the surface but suggestive of hidden depths. Originally an adaptation of a children’s nursery rhyme, it entered the Haggada, probably from Germany, in the late Middle Ages. It exemplifies the statement made by Hillel, who once saw a skull floating on the water and said: “Because you drowned others, they drowned you, and those who drowned you will themselves eventually be drowned” (Mishna <i>Avot</i> 2:7).
The theme is the destructive cycle of vengeance and retaliation. On one interpretation the kid is Israel. The “father” who bought it for two small coins is God, who redeemed Israel from Egypt through His two representatives, Moses and Aaron. The cat is Assyria, which conquered the northern kingdom of Israel. The dog is Babylonia, which defeated the southern kingdom of Judah. The stick is Persia, which replaced Babylonia as the imperial power in the sixth century bce. The fire is the Greeks, who defeated the Persians in the days of Alexander the Great. The water is Rome, which superseded ancient Greece. The ox is Islam, which defeated the Romans in Palestine in the seventh century. The slaughterer is Christianity – specifically the Crusaders, who fought Islam in Palestine and elsewhere, murdering Jews on the way. The angel of death is the Ottoman Empire, which controlled Palestine until the First World War. The song concludes with an expression of faith that “this too shall pass” and the Jewish people will return to its land. So it has been in our days.
Alternatively, the song may have been suggested by the statement of Rabbi Yehudah bar Ilai in the Talmud (<i>Bava</i> <i>Batra</i> 10a):
<span class="poetry indentAll">There are ten strong things in the world:</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Rock is strong, but iron breaks it.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Iron is strong, but fire melts it.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Fire is strong, but water extinguishes it.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Water is strong, but the clouds carry it.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">The clouds are strong, but the wind drives them.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">The wind is strong, but man withstands it.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Man is strong, but fear weakens him.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Fear is strong, but wine removes it.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Wine is strong, but sleep overcomes it.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Sleep is strong, but death stands over it.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">What is stronger than death?</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Acts of generosity (<i>tzedaka</i>), for it is written,</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">“<i>Tzedaka</i> delivers from death” [Prov. 10:2].</span>
More deeply, though, the song harks back to the beginning of creation and forward to the end of history. A midrash says that when God was about to create mankind, He consulted with the angels:
<span class="poetry indentAll">The ministering angels split into contending groups. Some said, “Let him be created!” while others said, “Let him not be created!” That is why it is written, “Mercy and truth collided, righteousness and peace engaged in a clash” [Ps. 85:11].</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Mercy said, “Let him be created, for he will do merciful deeds.” Truth said, “Let him not be created, for he will be full of falsehood.”</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Righteousness said, “Let him be created, for he will do righteous deeds.” Peace said, “Let him not be created, for he will never cease quarreling.”</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">What did the Holy One, blessed be He, do? He took truth and threw it to the ground. (<i>Genesis Raba</i> 8:5)</span>
This remarkable midrash turns the fundamental problem of faith upside down. The question is not “Given the nature of the world, how can God exist?” but rather, “Given the nature of God, how can the world exist?” How could God, who creates in love, bring into being a creature, man, who destroys in hate? How, having made the universe, could God create the one being capable of destroying it?
The midrash offers an answer: God took truth and threw it to the ground, saying, “Let truth grow from the earth” (Ps. 85:12). Human beings cannot stand exposure to too much truth. Reality is too awesome for us to see it steadily and whole. Therefore God proposes that man suffice with truth as it is on earth, not as it is in heaven. We see fragments of the Divine Presence, not more. Were we to see God face to face, we would cry, as did the Israelites at Sinai, “But now, why should we die? This great fire will consume us, and we will die if we hear the voice of the Lord our God any longer. For what mortal man has ever heard the voice of the living God speaking out of fire, as we have, and survived?” (Deut. 5:25–26). We catch glimpses of truth, fugitive and fleeting insights and no more; but it suffices.
Thus God answered the protest of truth. But what of the claim of peace? Since Cain and Abel the human story has been one of conflict, sibling rivalry, war, and bloodshed. Nor does it end. The Babylonians defeat the Assyrians, the Persians conquer the Babylonians, the Greeks overcome the Persians, and so it goes. Will there ever be a world of peace? The very silence of the midrash on this question suggests its own answer. The creation of man by God was an act of faith. An ancient rabbinic teaching interprets the phrase in Moses’ final address, “God of faith” (Deut. 32:4), to mean <i>God who had faith in the world He was about to create</i>. More than we have faith in God, God has faith in us – that one day we will learn the lesson of peace, that war never solved any conflict in the long run; that in victory the victor too is defeated; that in conquering others we diminish ourselves; that only in and through peace do we honor the image of God that is mankind.
Sir Henry Sumner Maine once said: “War appears to be as old as mankind, but peace is a modern invention” (“International Law: Its Origins and Sources”). In one respect he was wrong: the prophets of Israel were the first people in history, by many centuries, to conceive of peace as an ideal. No vision has echoed more eloquently than the words of Isaiah – today inscribed on a plaque opposite the United Nations building – “They will beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks. Nation will not take up sword against nation, nor will they train for war anymore” (Is. 2:4). The vision of the prophets was of a world at peace, when, again in Isaiah’s words:
<span class="poetry indentAll">He will destroy on this mount the shroud</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">That is drawn over the faces of all the peoples</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">And the sheet that is spread</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">Over all the nations.</span>
<span class="poetry indentAll">He will destroy death forever. (ibid. 25:7–8)</span>
So, having earlier expressed the <i>Jewish</i> hope, “Next year in Jerusalem rebuilt,” we end the seder night with the <i>universal</i> hope that the angel of death will one day be defeated by the long-overdue realization that God is life; that worshipping God means sanctifying life; that God’s greatest command is “Choose life” (Deut. 30:19); that we bring God into the world by reciting a blessing over life.
I find it almost unbearably moving that a people that has known so much suffering can summon the moral courage to end this evening of Jewish history on a supreme note of hope, and write it into the hearts of its children in the form of a nursery rhyme, a song. For what we give our children on this night of nights is something more and greater than the bread of oppression and the taste of Jewish tears. It is a faith that in this world, with all its violence and cruelty, we can create moments of redemption, signals of transcendence, acts of transfiguring grace. No people has risked and suffered more for a more slender hope, but no hope has lifted a people higher and led it, time and again, to greatness. So we end the night with a prayer and a conviction. The prayer: “God of life, help us win a victory over the forces of death.” And the conviction? That by refusing to accept the world that is, together we can start to make the world that ought to be.