Ben Sira
בן סירא
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ben Sira



Chapter 1

All wisdom is from the Lord, and is with him forever.
The sands of the seas, the drops of rain, and the days of eternity, who can count them?
The height of the sky, the breadth of the earth, and the depth of the abyss, who can estimate?
But exceeding the scope of these is wisdom, and truth is broader still.
To whom shall the root of wisdom be revealed (uncovered), and who knows her wiles (nakednesses).
He is uniquely awesome, God is executor of all of her treasuries.
He scrutinized her and examined her and counted her, and he gave her to his lovers.
Unto all flesh he gave her according to his desire, and he will give her to his lovers.


The fear of the Lord is glory and honor, and greatness and a crown of splendor.
The fear of the Lord gladdens the heart, and grants joy, and grace, and length of days.
Fear the Lord and do good by Him, and at the end of your days he will bless you.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and for the faithful it gestates in the belly.
From eternity it has been prepared for those who have integrity, and His grace is faithful to their offspring.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and it increases peace, life, and wellbeing.
All her treasuries will be filled to satisfaction, and her granaries with her satiation.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, she will intoxicate with her ample satiation.
She is a strong and reliable rod, praise and eternal glory unto those that follow her.
Her roots are eternal, and her branches are ever-reaching.
Happy is the person who meditates on her, and she benefits them more than any other treasury.
Happy is the person who draws close to her, and those in her presence enjoy themselves.
She will crown them with an eternal diadem, and eternal merit among holy ones.
They will rejoice in her and she in them, and she will never ever abandon them.
Angels of God will rejoice in her, and recount all the praises of the Lord.
And this recounting is entirely replete with her, happy is the one who attends and acts.
Hearken unto me fearers of God, listen and understand my words. The one who is steadfast in receiving her, has an eternal inheritance and great joy.
Attend to and act upon all my words, that you may be written in the book of life.
Love the fear of the Lord, that your heart may be happy and do not fear.
Draw near and do not distance yourself, that your soul may live. And in your drawing near, be like a hero and a warrior.
My child, do not fail in fearing the Lord, and do not approach God with attention divided (lit. a heart and a heart).
Give no weight to human regard, and be most careful with your speech.
Do not alter God's word and have no fear, lest you bring a curse on your soul.
For the Lord reveal your secrets, and bring your downfall in the midst of the community.
For you exalted yourself with feigned piety, but within your heart is full of shame.

Chapter 2

My child, if you will draw near to the work of the Lord, prepare your soul for all manner of trials.
Prepare your heart and be strengthened, and do not panic on the day of destruction.
Cleave unto God and do not turn away, that you may have a great future.
Receive all who come to you, and be of open spirit with your provisions.
For gold is tested in fire, and humanity is matured by poverty.
Have faith in God and God will strengthen you, firm your path and have hope in God.
Let those who fear the Lord anticipate God's grace, and not incline lest you fall.
Let those who fear the Lord trust in God, and God will not tarry in your reward.
Let those who fear the Lord (wait for) goodness, and for eternal joy and grace.
Look to the earlier generations, was there any that trusted in the Lord and was disgraced? (10) Or any who relied on God and was abandoned, or any who called on God and was not answered?
For compassionate and merciful is the Lord, forgiving transgressions and granting deliverance in an hour of need.
Woe to the weak-willed and those quick to give up, and to the wicked one with twisted ways.
Woe to the untrusting heart, it will surely not rise up.
Woe to you who lost hope, what will you do at the reckoning of the Lord?!
Those who fear the Lord will not change [boast] in his ways, and those who love him will preserve his paths.
Those who fear the Lord will seek his will, and those who love him will learn his law.
Those who fear the Lord will prepare their hearts, and before him humble their spirit.
We will fall by the hands of the Lord and not by the hands of humanity; for as he is great, so is his kindness.

Chapter 3

Listen to a father’s commands, and act accordingly so that you may live.
For the Lord has glorified father over children, and he has upheld a mother’s judgment over her children.
He who honors father will atone his sins; like one who hides a treasure is he who honors his mother.

He who honors father will be happy in his sons, and his prayers will be heard &amp; answered.
He who glorifies father will prolong his days, and the Lords' reward for honoring his mother.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6


















Child, from your youth acquire learning, and until gray hairs reach for wisdom.

Chapter 7



























With all your heart, honor your father; And the Mother who birthed you, do not ?loan?
Remember: If they were not, you would not have come to the world. And what you are doing to them, that they are your rearers.
With all your heart fear God; And his priests sanctify. 
With all your means love your maker; And his servers do not forsake.
Honor God and glorify a priest; Give their portions like you were commanded.
Bread of heroes and gift of a hand; Meat of the righteous and gift of the holy one.
Also to the needy stretch out a hand; So that you blessing will be repaid.
Give a gift to all life; Also from a corpse do not withhold kindness.
 Do not be late from ?criers?;  And with a mourner, mourn.
Do not lift [your] heart from a loved one; For from him you will be loved.
In all your actions remember the end; And never destroy.

Chapter 8

Do not fight with a great man; Why become destitute by his hand.
Do not fight with one harder than you; Why fall by his hand.
Do not ?plow? over a man without wealth; Perhaps he will weigh your money and you will lose.
For gold has made many reckless, and perverted [shin] the hearts of kings. 
Do not quarrel with a man of tongues, and heap not wood upon his fire.
Be not accustomed with a foolish man, lest thy ancestors be disgraced.
Do not humiliate a person returning from sin; remember we are all guilty.
Do not be wicked to an old person; remember, we shall be reckoned old too.
Do not rejoice over a corpse; remember that we all gathered away.
Do not forsake the rules of the wise, and tread not on their proverbs,
[And even their mundane talk do not disparage,] for it will stand you before noblemen, and from you they will learn instruction.
Do not despise the discourse of the aged, of what they heard from their fathers,
for from them thou shalt learn prudence, and in a time of need to respond proverbially. [Interpretation: folk ideas have hidden local knowledge and social truths that can be hard to parse at first.]
Do not prosper in the estate of evil, lest thou be burnt with the flame of his fire.
Do not be amiable with the scorner, lest he turn &amp; ambush you. [Interpretation: if he is bad-mouthing others, in short time he will do so about you.]
Do not lend to a person more powerful than you, and if lent, deem it lost.
Be not surety above thy ability; if thou be surety, set it aside as if paid.
Do not to litigate with a judge; for they will judge him according to his favor.
With a heartless person do not travel, lest you burden your companion; 
And so he will travel straight ahead [rashly], and by his folly you will perish. [Interpretation: someone who is careless of others, will act without regard to your needs.]
With a hot-tempered person do not be brazen, and do not travel with him;
Because bloodshed is light in his eyes, and where no rescuer, he'll waste you.
With a gullible one do not consult, for he cannot cover your secrets.
In the presence of a stranger do not do something odd [secret; council], for you do not know the consequences. [Interpretation: people may misconstrue different behavior and report as something it is not.]
Not with all men should one rejoice, and do not rinse [push-off] from yourself the [their] good. [Interpretation: don't be rejoiceful with everyone, for they may resent you; also, when someone does something good to you, acknowledge it gracefully, even if unwanted, so not to embarrass them.]

Chapter 9

Do not be jealous of the wife of your bosom, lest it teach [reveal] a bad trait of yourself.
Do not be jealous of the wife of your soul, lest she trample upon your sanctuary. 
Do not meet with a foreign female, lest you fall into her snares.
With a harlot do not take council, lest thou be captured in her wares. 
Disgraced upon seeing her, and destroyed upon leaving her house.
With charmed women do not sleep, lest your be burned with their lips. 
Gaze not on a virgin maid, lest thy be snared by her punishments. 
Do not give your soul to a harlot, lest you lose your inheritance.
Hide your eyes from a graceful woman, and do not ogle beauty not yours;
By a woman’s beauty many have gone astray [And strong ones her victims], and from her loved ones in fire burned.
Wit her husband, do not dine, nor go around with him drunk;
Lest thine heart incline unto her, and by your blood you're pushed into destruction.
Do not abandon an old friend, for the recent one is not his equal.
New wine is like a new friend; &amp; if it ages, maybe you will drink it.
Do not envy a sinner, for you do not know his day of reckoning.
Do not envy the success of the malicious; remember that until death he is not cleansed.
Keep far from a person who has authority to kill, and you will not be apprehensive of death, 
and if you are close, do not make a mistake, lest he take your soul.
Recognize that you are stepping on hot coals, and in a net you are walking.
With all your power, acquire friends, and consult with the wise.
With intelligent people should be your calculations, and all your secrets only between yourselves.
Let righteous men be your bread masters, and fear of the Lord your trappings.
With the handiwork of wisdom, will it be straight, and a leader in the midst of his people is wise. [Alternative: The work of craftsmen will be praised, and the leader of the people will be wise in his speech.]
Those who speak rashly sets fire to the town; a man of tongues and those that give orders are hated.

Chapter 10

The people's judge is a foundation to his people, and his dominion will understand its orders [rulings]. 
An wild king will destroy the city, and a city is settled by the intelligence of its rulers.
Like the judge of the people, so are his officers; and like the head of state, so are its inhabitants. 
In the Lord’s hand is a man’s success, and before the engraver [stele] will he set God's praise.
In the Lord’s hand is the governance of the realm, and a timely man will he raise to stand over it.
For every sin, do not repay evil to your neighbor, and walk not in the way of haughtiness.
Hateful before the Lord and humans is pride, and unjustly offending both.
Dominion is transferred from nation to nation on account of violence and haughtiness.
With what does earth and ashes behave arrogantly? because in his life he erected his back [body]?
The terror of the ill makes a physician shine; Today a king, and tomorrow he falls. [Alternative (1): A long illness mocks the physician  (2): A little illness reveals the skill of the healer (3): A whisper of illness makes a doctor happy.]
When a person dies he inherits these: worms, maggots, lice and swarms.
The beginning of pride is to act impudently, and to those that made him he turns away his heart.
For the pool of passion is sin, and its spring will pour out filth.
Therefore the Lord brought upon him injury (leprosy), and smote him until destroyed. 
Thrones of the haughty did the Lord overturn, and he seated the humble in their stead.
Footprints of the heathens did the Lord bury, and its roots to earths core did he exterminate.
And he scraped them from the earth and rooted them out, and erased their memorial from earth. [Ezekiel 26:4. Alternatively: "He rooted out their cartilage from the land" See M. Pesachim 7:11] 
Pride is not becoming of humans, nor impudence &amp; anger to those born to women.
What kind of offspring is honorable? A mans offspring. Offspring who fear the Lord. Honorable offspring keep the commandments. 
What kind of offspring is dishonorable? A mans offspring. Dishonorable offspring who transgress the commandments.
Amongst brothers [kin] their leader is honorable, and the fear the Lord is in his people.
Immigrant and stranger, foreigner and poor person— their boast is fear of the Lord.
Do no denigrate an intelligent poor person, and do not glorify a sinful man who has risen.
A noble, ruler, judge shall be glorified, but nothing is greater than fearing the Lord.
An intelligent servant shall rise, and a foolish servant will not complain. 
Do not be shrewd to perform your desires, and do not extol yourself in your hour of difficulty.
Superior is a person who toils and accumulates treasure, to one who is extolled but lacks allotment. 
Son, in humility give honor to your soul, and it will give you the taste and respect that you lost.
Him who errs against his own soul—who will vindicate? And who will give repute to him who devalues his own life?
There is a poor person respected for his intelligence, and there are those respected because of his wealth.
A person respected in wealth, how thus [higher]? A man despised in poverty, how thus [lower]?
He who is respected in poverty, in wealth he is further respected. 
And he who is held in disrepute in wealth, how much more also in poverty?

Chapter 11

A poor person’s wisdom will raise up his head, and it will seat him in the midst of nobles.  
Do not praise a man for his appearance, and do not loathe a man ugly in look.  
Small among the flying is the bee, and first among all fruitage is her produce [honey].  
A lost mantle do not mock, and do not decry in the bitterness of day.  [Alternative: Do not scoff at the ones whose day is bitter.]
Because the works of the Lord are a wonder, and his works are hidden from humans. 
Many oppressed ones sat on the throne; and those not thought of wrapped in a [priestly] turban. 
Many powerful people were dishonored greatly, and lowered too, and illustrious ones were delivered into the hands of others.
Before investigation, do not overrule; inspect internally, and then chastise [Alternative: lend]. 
My Son, before listening, do not answer, and in the middle of speaking, do not interrupt.  
If you aren't wounded, do not kindle a dispute, and in a trial of sinners, do not stand. 
My son, why add to your contentions? Do not multiply them; you won't be saved.
My son, if you do not pursue, you will not attain, and if you do not search, you will not find. 
There exists one who toils and struggles and hurries, and nevertheless he is late. 
There're those who are crushed and in despair walk, lacking all, and moreover are poor. 
And the eyes of the Lord looked upon him for good, and shook off his dusty stench.  
Carried up by his head and lifted him, and many were perplexed. 
Good and bad, life and death, penury and wealth are from the Lord. 
Wisdom, intelligence, and perceptivity are from the Lord, sin and straight paths are from the Lord. 
Foolishness and darkness had been created for sinners, and along with it, evil friends.
The estate of righteousness shall remains with his fearful, and his wants shall eternally succeed . 
There exists one who becomes rich from his suffering, and this obligates this reward: 
In time, he will say: “I have found rest, and now I will eat of my good.” 
He does not know what's to come and pass, and he'll leave them to others and die. 
My son, stand on your principles, and walk with it, and in your work take hold strong. 
Do not wonder at the doings of evil, run to the Lord, and await his light.
Because all is in front of the Lord eyes, to suddenly and quickly, make a needy person rich. 
The Lord’s blessing is the righteous' lot, and in his hopeful time his good pleasure sprout. 
Do not say, “ill do as I wish, And if he forsakes me, what now?... 
Do not say, “I have enough, and what calamity can occur to me?” 
In a day of prosperity, you'll forget adversity, and in a day of adversity, you'll forget good, and the end of man will be on the Lord. 
A bad time and you'll forget pleasure, and in a person’s end he will tell of the Lord. 
Before inspecting man, to not praise him, for in his end man will be straightened [in a coffin]. 
Before death praise no strongman, for in his end he'll bad deeds will be known. 
Halt the multitude from your home, and not all men invite to your house, for many are ambushers and knaves. 
Many have been the wounded peddlers, who accustom [similar to 'pearls;]  themselves to licentiousness. [Rashi Yevamot 63b: referring to men who travel to sell women’s jewelry. Their frequent dealings with women lead their husbands to harm them. Note: Talmud breaks the sentence.] 
[Those who accustom themselves to licentiousness] are like a spark that ignites a coal. As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit [Jeremiah 5:27]. 
A as a bird seized in a cage, so is the heart of haughtiness, and like a wolf ambushing his pray. 
What's gained by violent sinners, like a dog they come to each house wrathfully. 
So the covetous comes, increasing strife to all the inhabitants. 
The ambush of the gossiper is like a bear to the house of scorners, and like a spy he searches for licentiousness.  
From good to bad will he turn your crowds, and on your precious things he will conspire. 
From a spark of fire coals are multiplied, and a sinful person lies in ambush for blood.  
Be a stranger to evil, for evil births, why an eternal blemish carry.  
Attach thyself not to evil, to twist your ways, your covenant overturn [sim. drop].  
From a foreign neighbor, heed your way; he may tear your tranquility, and become acquainted with your valuables. 

Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26

A good wife, happy is her husband; and the number of his days is doubled.
A valiant wife is satisfying to her husband; and he will spend the years of his life in joys.
A good wife is a good gift, given to the lap of those who revere God.

Chapter 27



Chapter 28

Do not suffer from tomorrow’s trouble, as you do not know what a day will bring.

Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39



Chapter 40



Chapter 41



Chapter 42



Chapter 43



Chapter 44

I wish to praise the pious men, our ancestors in their generations.
Much honored portion of the Highest, and and His greatness from the days of old
The earth's generations in their kingdoms, and the people of renown in their might; counselors in their understanding, and seers in their prophecy.
Noblemen of nations in their designs, rulers in their plans; wise thinkers in their books, and proverb-tellers in their preserved works.
Composers of psalms by decree, princes of proverbs by writing.
Men of valor and steadfast power, and tranquil upon their foundations.
All these in their generations, in their days, were renowned.
From among them some left a name, that they be rested on their legacy.
And from among them some were not remembered, and ceased to be when they ceased to be.
When they were no more, they were no more, and their children after them.
Still, these were pious men, and their hope will not cease.
With their seed is their faithful goodness, and their inheritance to their children's children.
Forever and ever their memories stand, and their righteousness will not be forgotten
Their corpses are in peace gathered up, and their names live from generation to generation.
Their wisdom the community will repeat, and their praises the assembly will recount.
Ḥanokh was found pure, and walked with God, and was taken - a sign of knowledge from generation to generation....
Righteous Noaḥ was found pure, at a time of destruction he was substituted; for his sake there was a remnant, and in his covenant the Flood ceased.
Through an eternal sign the covenant was made with him, and without it all flesh would have been wiped out.
Avraham was a father of many [av hamon] nations, given no blemish in his glory.
He kept the commandments of the Highest, and came with a covenant with Him. In his flesh a law was cut, and in his test he was found  faithful.
Thus, with an oath He held him up, to bless nations with his seed; to grant them from sea to sea, and from the River to the edge of the land.
And also to Yitzḥaq He brought a son, for the sake of Avraham his father; a covenant of all given from the first, and a blessing rested on the head of Israel.
And He founded him with a blessing, and He gave him his inheritance; and he established him with tribes, as a portion twelvefold.
And he brought from him a man, finding grace in the eyes of all life. 

Chapter 45

Beloved by God and man, Moshe, remembered for good.
And God honored him, and strengthened him in the heights.
With his words, the letters He sped up, and He strengthened him before the king; and He commanded the people, and they saw His glory.
In his faithfulness and his humility, He chose him from all flesh.
And He caused him to hear his voice, and He drew him to the thick cloud; and He placed in his hand the commandment, the Torah of life and understanding; to teach Yaaqov His laws, and His statues and ordinances to Israel.
And He raised Aharon, he the tribe of Levi, to holiness, and He placed him as an eternal law.
And He put upon him splendor, and He appointed him minister in His glory; and girded him with the majesty of the aurochs, and clothed him with bells.
And He clothed him all in majesty, and beautifued him in glory and strength; breeches, tunic, robe, and surrounded him in bells.
And many pomegranates surrounding, to make music with his steps.
Holy clothes, gold, purple, and crimson, works of the masters; breatplate of judgement, ephod and girdle, and two scarlet threads, woven.
Precious stones upon the breastplate, sealed and engraved in openings; every stone called a memory, written carved for the number of the children of Israel.
A pure-gold crown, robe, turban, and headplate carved with a holy seal; splendrous glory and praiseworthy strength, pleasant to see and entirely beauty.
Before him was none like him, thus after him no stranger will wear it. He trusted in him and in his sons like this, and thus his sons to their generations.
Their grain-offering is entirely smoked, and on every day it is twice offered.
And He filled Moshe's hand, and He anointed him with holy oil; and he was to Him an eternal covenant, and to his seed as in the days of heaven.
To minister and to serve as priest for Him, and to bless His people with His name. And He chose him from all life, to bring the whole-offerings and the suet-offerings.
And to burn a sweet smell and a remembrance, and to atone for the children of Israel.
And He gave his people a law, and a rule to the children of Israel; and strangers were angry with him, and jealous of him in the desert.
The men of Datan and Aviram, and the congregation of Qoraḥ in their enraged anger; and they saw ADONAI and He was enraged, and destroyed them in his great anger.
And He brought a sign to them, and consumed them in blazing fire; and He added His glory to Aharon, and gave him His inheritance.
The holy first-part He gave him bread, and fires of ADONAI consumed them. The shewbread portiopn, and a gift to him and his seed.
Yet in their land he would not inherit, and in their midst he would not receive an inheritance; the fires of ADONAI are his portion and inheritance, in the midst of the children of Israel.
And also, Pinḥas ben El'azar, in his strength, a third portion. In his zealousness to the God of all, and he stood at the people's breach.
And who, in his nobility, his heart, atoned for the children of Israel; thus he also was given a law, an eternal covenant to administer the Sanctuary.
That would be his and his seeds, a great priesthood for all time. And also His covenant with David son of Yishai of the tribe of Judah.
A portion of fire before His glory, the portion of Aharon to all his seed. And now, bless, please, ADONAI the good.
He crowns you with glory, He gives you a wise heart; that you not forget your goodness, and your strength for all generations.

Chapter 46

A warrior, son of valor, Yehoshua son of Nun, minister to Moshe in prophecy; who was made a guardian in his days, a great salvation to His chosen ones.
To avenge vengeance on the enemies, and to inherit Israel. How admirable when he stretched his hand, when he waved his javelin at a city.
Who is it who could stand against him? For the wars of ADONAI were fought.
Was it not by his hand that the sun stood still, a single day as if it were two?
For he called to God the Highest, as his enemies surrounding forced him; and God the Highest answered him, with stones of ice and hail.
He threw them down on the enemy nation, and as they fled destroyed them all; so that all battling nations knew, that ADONAI guards their wars.
And he also was fully following God, and in the days of Moses did piety; he and Kalev son of Yefuneh, to hold fast against the wild assembly.
To turn anger from the congregation, and to end their evil report; thus the two of them were spared from the six hundred thousand infantry.
To bring them to their inheritance, a land flowing with milk and honey; and He gave to Kalev wisdom and until old age it stayed with him.
To guide him upon the heights of the land, and also his seed took an inheritance; that all the seed of Yaakov know that it is good to fully follow after Adonai.
And the judges, each man by his name, every one who didn't self-glorify; and didn't durn away from following God, may their memories be blessed.
[May their essences flower as a rose], and may their names pass on to their children!
Beloved of his people, desired of deeds, chosen from the womb of his mother; a nazirite of ADONAI in prophecy, Shmuel, the priestly judge. At the word of God he established a monarchy, and he anointed princes over hte people.
With the commandment of ADONAI he commanded the congregation, and the God of Yaakov took note of them.
In his faithful mouth he expounded a vision, and in his trusted word guidance.
And he also called to God, as his enemies surrounding forced him; as he offered up a lamb's suet, ADONAI thundered from heaven.
With a mighty crash His voice was heard, and He subdued the nobility of the enemy, and destroyed all the Philistine tyrants.
And when it came time for his final rest, he testified to ADONAI and His anointed.
Did I take bribes or secret payments from anyone? And not one person answered him. And until the the end of his time, he was found right in the eyes of ADONAI.
And in the eyes of all life, and also after his death he expounded.
And he told the king his ways and lifted from the ground his voice in prophecy.

Chapter 47

And also after him arose Natan, to stand forth against David.
For just as the suet is the highest of the holy offering, so too David from Israel.
With lions he played as with a goat, and with bears as a calf from the east.
In his youth he struck down the warrior, and causing him eternal pain and shame; with a flick of his hand on the sling, and he broke the majesty of Golyat.
For he called to God the Highest, and He gave strength in his right hand; to hold back a man knowing in war, and to raise the horn of Israel.
Thus the girls sang to him, and established him with "ten thousand." When crowned in a turban he fought, and all around him subjugated enemies.
And he went against the Philistine foe, and to this day shattered their horn.
In all his deeds he gave thanks, to God the Highest with words of glory. In all his heart he loved his Maker, and every day he thanked him with music.
Melodies, songs, he established for the temple, and the sound of psalms and harps he made.
And he gave splendor and beauty and honor to the festivals year after year; as he blessed the Holy Name, before the morning he raised justice.
Also ADONAI passed over his transgression, and He raised his horn forever; and He gave him a law of monarchy, and his throne He established up to Jerusalem.
And on his account arose after him a wise son, dwelling in security.
Shlomo was king in prosperous days, and God caused him quiet all around.
He who built a house for His name, and he founded an eternal Sanctuary.
How wise were you in your youth! Your instruction flowed like the Nile!
Land covered in Your wisdom, and Your song praised on the heights.
With song, parable, riddle, and quote, all the people were amazed.
You were called in the Glorious Name, that which was called over Israel; and amassed gold like iron, and like lead multiplied silver.
And you gave your lust to women, and they ruled you in your pride.
And you brought a blemish on your glory, and profaned your bead, to bring anger on your descendants, and moaning upon your deathbead.
To a portion of the people to two tribes, and from Ephraim a kingdom of violence.
But God will not forsake piety, and will not let His words fall to the ground; He will not cut off from His chosen grandson or great-grandson, and the seed of His beloved He will not destroy.
And He gave to Yaakov a remnant, and to the house of David a root from them; and Shlomo lay down to die hopeless, and help withered from him.
Wide in stupidity and lacking in wisdom, Reḥov'am whose counsel made the people unruly; until one arose – may he have no memory! – Yerov'am son on Nevaṭ, who sinned and caused sin to Israel.
And he gave to Ephraim a stumbling-block, to force them from their land; and he increased his sin greatly, and to all evil he was addicted.

Chapter 48

Until a prophet like fire arose, whose words were like a flaming oven.
And he shattered their staff of bread, and in his zealousness reduced them greatly.
With a word of God, the heavens stopped; and rained three fires.
How awesome are you, Eliyahu, and who is like you in wonder?
Who raised a corpse from death, and from Sheol, as ADONAI willed.
Who brought kings down to the pit, and nobles up from their sickbeds.
Who anointed the one who fulfilled retribution, and the prophet who replaced you.
Who heard reproofs at Sinai, and at Ḥorev judgements of vengeance.
Who was taken up in a whirlwind, in a regiment of heaven's fire.
Who was written truly for the time, to stop anger before the rage of God; to return the hearts of fathers to their sons, and to establish the tribes of Israel.
Happy is one who sees you and dies, and happy are you for you still live.
Eliyahu, who in the treasuries is hidden, and whose spirit filled Elisha; for many twofold signs and wonders came from all that came from his mouth.
In his days he never cowered before anything, and no mortal power ruled his spirit. Not a thing was too wondrous for him, and from below him his flesh was created.
In his life he did wonders, and in his death powerful deeds.
With all this the people did not repent; and did not cease from their sins; until they were torn from their land, and scattered in all the earth.
And a few remained with Judah, and there still was a ruler from the house of David. And there were from among them who did right, and there were from among them who did evil.
Yeḥizqiyahu strengthened his city by bringing into it water; and he cut through rock with bronze, and dammed the mountains for a pool.
In his days Sanḥeriv arose, and sent out Ravshaqeh; and he lifted his hand against Zion, and blasphemed God in his pride.
Then they were appalled at his pride, and writhed like a woman in later.
And they called to God the Highest, and they spread out their hands.
And He smote the camp of Assyria, and they were devastated in a plague.
Thus did Yeḥizqiyahu good, and was strong in the ways of David [as Yeshayahu the prophet commanded him, praised among the prophets.]
[In his days the sun stood, and added to the life of the king.]
With a great spirit he saw the end, and comforted the mourners of Zion.
Eternally he told them what would be, and secrets before they occured.