Maggid Mishneh on Mishneh Torah, Ownerless Property and Gifts
מגיד משנה על משנה תורה, הלכות זכייה ומתנה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Maggid_Mishneh_on_Mishneh_Torah,_Ownerless_Property_and_Gifts
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Maggid Mishneh on Mishneh Torah, Ownerless Property and Gifts



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Halakhah 1



Halakhah 2

All land gift deeds etc.  When the Rambam specified land, it is not to indicate that a secretive chattel gift deeds are valid, for we commonly say that these may not be used and this is agreed to by commentators, and also the Rambam introduced the topic of one who gifts without mention of land. The reason the term land is used is because for chattels gift deeds are not sufficient by themselves without a proper act of acquisition. But the same rule applies by chattels that a secretive deed is not valid. This ruling is brought in Baba Batra 40b:   "Rav Yehuda says: With regard to this document detailing a concealed gift, we do not collect with it. The Gemara clarifies: What are the circumstances of a concealed gift? Rav Yosef said: It is referring to a case in which the giver said to witnesses: Go and hide and write a document for the recipient of this gift. And there are those who say that Rav Yosef said: It is referring to a case in which the giver did not say to witnesses: Sit outdoors in the marketplace and write it for him. The Gemara asks: What is the difference between the two versions of Rav Yosef’s statement? The Gemara answers: The difference between the two versions is in a case where his instructions were without specification, i.e., he did not tell them to write the document in private or in public. A dilemma was raised before the Sages: What is the status of a document detailing a gift that is with-out specification as to whether the giver desired that it be publicized? Ravina says: We are not concerned that it may be a concealed gift, and Rav Ashi says: We are concerned. And the halakha is that we are concerned." And that is why the Rambam stated that the document is suspect to be a secret gift and the recipient is not entitled to the gift. This is also the view of Rabenu Shmuel (Rashbam) and Rabenu Chanan’el. This seems reasonable because of the second version of Rav Yosef which explains the meaning of a concealed gift according to Rav Yehuda (i.e. unless it is spelled out that the gift is not concealed it is considered concealed). And Rav Yehuda is very clear that it cannot be used. But some Ga'onim disagree and say that because we (only) need to concerned, and it does not say that there is no gift, So it only remains a concern. And perhaps we can deduce that it is dealing with a case in which a person states an intention to give a gift, and repeatedly delays the giving, and then he tells witnesses to write a gift deed  (without a publicity clause) in such a case one definitely needs to be concerned as it may just be a delaying technique. But in a case in which a person wants to give the gift there is no reason for concern, and we would not consider a gift deed without a publicity clause as a concealed gift, but it would be a valid gift deed. …And another explanation is that while we are concerned the gift is not invalidated. And this makes a difference in a case when the one who gifts raises an objection which is recognized (and invalidates the gift) but if he does not raise an objection then the deed is valid. 