Mishneh Torah, Hiring
משנה תורה, הלכות שכירות
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Hiring



Chapter 1

Four guardians have been mentioned in the Torah, but only three rules govern their liability. The four guardians are: 1) the gratuitous guardian 2) the borrower, 3) the paid guardian, and 4) the hirer.
The three rules that govern their liability are:<br>a) A gratuitous guardian from whom the deposited object was stolen or lost, and needless to say if it was overcome by a major accident, as in the case of an animal that dropped dead or was carried off, may take an oath that he had guarded it properly and be free from liability, as it is written: "When a man gives money or goods to another for safekeeping, and they are stolen from the man's house … the owner of the house shall depose before the judges (Exodus 22:6-7).<br>b) A borrower must make restitution in every case, whether the object borrowed was lost or stolen or overcome by a major accident, as when a borrowed animal dropped dead or was injured or carried off. Concerning the borrower it is written: "When a man borrows [an animal] from another, and it was injured or died, its owner not being with it, he must make restitution" (13).<br>c) A paid guardian and a hirer are both subject to one rule. They are obligated to make restitution if either the hired object or the deposit for a fee was stolen or lost. But if something worse happened [through a superior force], as in the case of an animal that dropped dead or was injured, carried off, or torn by beasts, the paid guardian or the hirer may take an oath that the animal met with an accident and be released from liability, as it is written: "When a man gives to another a donkey, an ox, a sheep or any other animal to guard, and it dies or is injured, or is carried off, with no witness about, an oath before the Lord shall decide between the two of them" (9-10). It is written moreover: "But if it was stolen from him, he shall make restitution to its owner" (11).<br>Hence it follows that the gratuitous guardian clears himself by his oath in all cases; the borrower pays in all cases, except in the case of an animal that died from work, as will be explained ; the receiver of a fee and the hirer pay for what is lost or stolen, but they take an oath about the major accidents, namely about the injured or captured or dead or torn animal; or in a case where the object was lost in shipwreck or was taken by armed robbers; and so too, all similar major accidents.<br>3. When a man gives something to another for safekeeping, whether gratuitously or for a fee, or if he lent or rented it to him, the guardian is free from all responsibility if he borrowed or hired the services of the owner. Even if he was negligent with regard to the safekeeping of the object and it was lost through his fault, he is not answerable, as it is written: "If its owner was with it, no restitution need be paid; but if it was hired, he loses the hiring fee" (14).— — This [biblical verse] has been traditionally interpreted to mean that if the lender was with the borrower at the moment of the borrowing, though he was not with him at the time of the theft or the death of the animal, the borrower is exempt. But if the lender was not with the borrower at the moment of the borrowing, even though he was with him at the time the animal died or was carried off, the borrower is liable. The same rule applies to all other bailees: they are exempt if the owners were present, even in a case of negligence.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7


If a man rented his house to another for a year, and it became a leap-year, the advantage of an extra month is gained by the tenant. If the lease was made by the month, the benefit of the extra month accrues to the lessor.— —


If a man leased an orchard, or if it was mortgaged to him, for ten years, and it dried up during the term of the lease, the dead trees should be sold and land should be purchased for the price realized from the sale. The lessee or mortgagee may enjoy its fruit products until the end of the lease or the mortgage. Neither the creditor nor the debtor may use the trees that dried up or were cut, since they would constitute a form of usury.

Chapter 8


The man who rents a field or an orchard to cultivate and to spend money on it, giving the landowner one-third or one-fourth of the produce, or anything they have stipulated, is called share-cropper. Whatever is spent on fencing the land, the landowner is required to pay ; and whatever is spent on extra precaution, the tenant or share-cropper is required to pay.— —





If one leased a field from another and refused to weed it, saying to the lessor: "What are you losing? I am paying you rent, anyway," we should not listen to him, since the lessor may reply: "Tomorrow you may probably vacate it, and it will yield me nothing but weeds." Even if the lessee said: "I will plough it up at the end of my term," we should not listen to him.
If one leased a field from another to sow it in barley, he may not sow it in wheat, since wheat exhausts the soil more than barley. If he leased it to sow it in wheat, he may sow it in barley; in pulse, he may not sow it in grain; in grain, he may sow it in pulse.— —

Chapter 9

If a man hired workers and told them to work early or to work late, he cannot compel them to do so where it is customary not to work early or not to work late.— —

If a man said to his agent: "Go and hire workers for me at three <i>zuz</i>," and he went and hired them at four, then if the agent said to them: "I am responsible for your wages," he must pay them four even though he receives only three from the employer, and he loses one out of his own pocket. If, however, he said to them: "The employer is responsible for your wages," the employer should pay them according to local custom.— —

Chapter 10



Chapter 11

It is a positive command to pay the hired man his wages on time, as it is written: "You must pay him his wages on the same day" (Deuteronomy 24:15). If the employer delayed the payment till after it was due, he has transgressed a prohibitive command, as it is written: "Let not the sun go down upon it." The transgressor is not to be lashed for this, since he is required to pay money. One must pay on time not only the hire of a human being but also the hire of an animal and the hire of implements. If one put off the payment, he has transgressed a prohibitive command.— —
Anyone who detains the wages of a hired man is as if he took his life, as it is written: "His life depends on it" (15). — — When are wages due? A hireling for the day collects his wages all night, and about him it is written: "You shall not detain overnight the wages of your day laborer until morning" (Leviticus 19:13). A hireling for the night collects all day, and about him it is written: "You must pay him his wages on the same day" (Deuteronomy 24:15). A hireling by the hour during the day collects all day; a hireling by the hour during the night collects all that night ; a hireling by the week, by the month, by the year, by a seven-year period, collects all day if his term ends in the daytime; if his term ends in the night, he collects all that night.
If a man gave his garment to a craftsman and the craftsman completed his work on it and informed the owner about it, the latter has not broken a law even if he has delayed the payment for a period of ten days, as long as the object remains in the hands of the craftsman. If the craftsman gave him the garment in the middle of the day, the owner has transgressed the law against withholding the wages overnight as soon as the sun went down, because contract work is like hire, and the employer is required to pay the employee on time.
If a man said to his agent: "Go and hire workers for me," and the agent told them: "The employer is responsible for your wages," neither of them transgresses the law against withholding overnight: the employer, because he did not hire them ; and the agent, because they did not work for him. If, however, the agent did not say to them: "The employer is responsible for your wages," the agent commits a transgression if they are not paid on time. The hirer commits a transgression only when the employee has asked for the wages and he has failed to pay. But if the employee has not asked to be paid, or if he did ask and the employer did not have the money to pay, or if he gave the employee a draft on another person and the employee accepted it, the employer is free from liability [if the employee fails to collect the draft within the set time].
If a man withheld the wages of an employee until after it was due, he must pay him immediately even though he has already transgressed a positive as well as a negative command. And as long as he keeps withholding the wages thereafter, he transgresses a negative command based on the words of the sages, as it is written: "Never say to your fellow man: Go, and come again" (Proverbs 3:28).
If an employee that was hired in the presence of witnesses demanded his wages within the set time and the employer told him : "I have given you your wages," while the employee claimed: "I have received nothing," then, by an enactment of the sages, the employee should take an oath while holding a sacred object in his hand, and collect what he claims, as in the case of any claimant who swears and collects, because the employer is preoccupied with his workmen [and may have forgotten to pay], while the employee sets his heart upon this wage. Even if the employer is a minor, the employee takes an oath and collects.<br>If, however, the employer hired the man in the absence of witnesses, he is believed when he says: "I have hired you and paid your wage," since he could say: "Nothing of the sort, I have never hired you." The employer therefore takes a rabbinic oath of exemption that he has paid, or a biblical oath if he admitted part of the claim, as in the case of all other lawsuits.<br>If the employee had one witness that the man hired him, he is of no help to him. So too, if the employee asked to be paid subsequent to the time when the wage was due, even though he had been hired in the presence of witnesses, [the rule applied to him is that] the man who claims anything from another must bring proof. If the employee has produced no evidence [that he had been asking for his wage ever since it had become due], the employer takes a rabbinic exemption oath. If, however, the employee has produced evidence that he had been demanding the wage all the time, he takes an oath and collects the same day of his demand. If, for example, he worked for the employer on a Monday until evening, payment is due throughout the night preceding Tuesday, but he cannot take an oath and collect on Tuesday. If, however, he has brought witnesses that he had been demanding his wage throughout the night preceding Tuesday, he takes an oath and collects throughout Tuesday. But from the night preceding Wednesday and thereafter, the rule is applied: the man who claims anything from another must produce proof. So too, if he has brought witnesses that he had kept demanding his wage until Thursday, he takes an oath and collects throughout Thursday.
If the employer says: "I have agreed to pay you two <i>zuz</i>," and the employee claims: "You have agreed to pay me three <i>zuz</i>," in such a case the sages have not enacted that the employee should take an oath, but: the man who claims anything from another must produce proof. If he has brought no evidence, the employer takes an oath while holding a sacred object, even though he has already given him two <i>zuz</i> or told him: "Here they are." This rule is by rabbinic enactment, so that the employee should not walk away discouraged. This applies only where the hiring took place in the presence of witnesses who did not know how much the employer agreed to pay to the employee, who demanded his wage within the set time. If, however, he was hired in the absence of witnesses, or if he demanded his wage after the time it had become due, let the employer take an exemption oath that he did not agree to pay the employee more than what he has already paid him, or that he owes him no more than what he has offered to pay, as is the rule regarding all claims.
If a man gives his garment to a craftsman for repair and then the craftsman says: "You have stipulated to pay me two <i>zuz</i>," and the employer says: "I have stipulated only one," as long as the garment is in the hands of the craftsman and he is in position to claim that he has acquired it by purchase, he may take an oath while holding a sacred object and collect. He may claim it for all it is worth as his payment. But if the garment is out of his possession or if he has no <i>ḥazakah</i> (right of possession) in it and cannot claim that he has acquired it by purchase, [the rule applied is :] the man who claims anything from another must produce evidence. If he has not produced evidence, the owner of the garment takes an exemption oath, or a biblical oath if he has admitted part of the claim, as is the rule in all claims. The law of a hired man is not applicable to such a case.
A hired worker who comes to take an oath should not be treated with strictness, and should not be made to take additional oaths at all; he is to swear only that he has not received his wage and be paid. All others who come to take an oath are not to be treated as leniently as a hired man, for whom we should make it easy. The court should open proceedings by saying to him: "Do not grieve; take an oath and collect." Even if his wage was only a penny, and the employer claims <i>I have paid it</i>, the hired man can collect only by oath. So too, all the claimants who take an oath and collect cannot collect even a penny without a quasi-biblical oath [while holding a sacred object].

Chapter 12

When men are working at anything that grows from the soil, while the work is yet unfinished, whether it is detached from the soil or still attached to it and the men are engaged in the final processing, the employer is enjoined to allow them to eat of whatever they are working on, as it is written: "When you enter your neighbor's vineyard, you may eat as many of his grapes as you wish … When you go through your neighbor's grainfield, you may pluck some of the ears with your hand…" (Deuteronomy 23:25-26). Traditionally interpreted, this verse refers only to a hired worker. If he was not hired, who permitted him to enter the vineyard or the grainfield of his neighbor without the latter's consent? Hence, Scripture means to say: if you enter the owner's domain for work, you may eat.
What difference is there between one who is working on something that is detached from the soil and one who is working on something that is still attached to the soil? The man who is working at a fruit already plucked may partake of it until it has been completely processed, and is forbidden to partake of it after it has been completely processed; but the one who is working at something that is still attached to the soil, such as a gatherer of grapes or a reaper, may partake of it only after he has completed his work. If, for example, the hired worker gathered the grapes, filled the basket, shook it out into another place, came back and filled the basket with more grapes that he gathered, he might not partake of the grapes until he filled all the baskets.— —











If a man, working together with his wife, children and servants, stipulated with the employer that none of them should partake of what they were working on, they must not eat of it. This rule applies only to adults who, being sensible, are fully aware that they have renounced their privilege to eat; but as to minors, one may not stipulate that they shall not eat, because what they eat neither belongs to their father nor to their master; it belongs to God.

Chapter 13







Just as the employer is warned against robbing the wage of the poor workman, and against delaying it, so is the poor workman warned against robbing the employer by idling away his time on the job, a little here and a little there, thus wasting the entire day deceitfully. He must be scrupulous throughout the time of work. Also, he is required to work to the best of his ability, as the upright Jacob said: "I have served your father with all my strength" (Genesis 31:6). For this reason, he was rewarded even in this world, as it is written: "The man became exceedingly rich" (30:43).