Mishneh Torah, Hiring
משנה תורה, הלכות שכירות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Hiring



Chapter 1

The Torah lists four types of bailees, and three laws apply to them. The four bailees are: the unpaid bailee, the borrower, the paid bailee, and the renter.
These are the three laws that apply to them. If the deposit is stolen from the unpaid bailee or it is lost and, of course, if the deposit is lost through <i>force majeure</i> - for example [the deposit] was livestock and it died or was taken captive: [The bailee] swears that he exercised the ordinary care of bailees and is exempt. As is written "And it is stolen from the man's home" (Exodus 22:6); "And the house-holder shall approach God" (Exodus 22:7). The borrower repays [the owner] in all situations, whether the borrowed item is lost, or stolen, or whether there was force majeure e.g. the borrowed animal died or was injured or taken captive, for thus is written about the borrower: "If [the animal] was injured or died and its owner was not with it - he shall pay" (Exodus 22:13). The same law applies to the paid bailee and to the renter. If the object which [the bailee] rented or was paid to guard was stolen or lost - they pay [the owner]. But if there is force majeure - e.g. there was an animal and it died or was injured or taken captive or became afflicted with a fatal disease - [the paid bailee and the renter] swear that it was force majeure and they are exempt. As it is written: "If it dies or is injured or taken captive and there is no witness" (Exodus 22:9) "the oath of the Lord ..." (Exodus 22:10), and it is written: "If it is stolen from him, he must pay its owner..." (Exodus 22:11). In summary: An unpaid bailee takes an oath in every situation. And a borrower pays in all situations, unless it dies while it is working, as will be explained. A paid bailee and a renter pay for a lost or stolen [deposit], but they take an oath in cases of force majeure such as when the animal is injured or taken captive or killed or develops fatal disease. Or if the object is lost in a boat that sinks or is taken by armed bandits or anything like this that is a case of force majeure.
One who deposits [property] with his fellow - whether for free, or the owner paid the bailee, or the owner lent it to him, or he rented it out to him - if the bailee also took the owner for free along with his property - or hired [the owner for money] - the bailee is completely exempt from all [loss to the property]. As it is said: "If [the property's] owner is with it, he need not pay; if [the property's owner] is a hired worker, [the risk of damage to his property] is included in his wage" (Exodus 22:14). In what circumstances does this apply? When the owners volunteered or were hired at the same time as [the bailee] took the object, even if the owner was not with the object at the time of the theft or the loss or when the [object was lost through] force majeure. But if [the bailee] took the object - and first became a bailee - and only afterwards hired the owners or had them volunteer - even if the owner is standing there at the time when the deposited object is harmed - the [bailee] must pay. As it is written "If its owner is not with it - [the bailee] must pay." (Exodus 22:13). They learned from tradition: If [the owner] was with it at the time of borrowing, even though he was not there at the time of the theft or the death - [the bailee] is exempt. If [the owner] was not with it at the time of borrowing, even though he was with it at the time of death or capture - [the bailee] is liable. And this is the case for the other [types of] bailees. If any of [the objects] come with their owners - [the bailees] are exempt. Even if [the bailee] is negligent - if the object came with its owner, [the bailee] is exempt.
If a bailee was at fault at the beginning, even though the object was - in the end - lost through <i>force majeure</i>, [the bailee] may be liable, as will be explained. And the borrower is not permitted to lend [what he borrowed] to a third party. Even if he borrowed a Torah scroll - where everyone who reads from it performs a <i>mitzvah</i> - he may not lend it to a third party. Likewise, the renter is not permitted to rent out [the object] [to a third party]. Even if [the owner] rented a Torah scroll to him, he may not rent it to a third party, for [the owner] can say to [the bailee]: I don't want my deposit to be in the hands of a third party. If the bailee transgresses and passes the [object] to a second bailee - if there are witnesses that the second bailee exercised the ordinary care of bailees and [the object was lost through] <i>force majeure</i>, the first bailee is not liable - because there are witnesses that [the loss occurred through <i>force majeure</i>. But if there are no witnesses there, the first bailee has to pay the owner, because he passed [the object] to another bailee. And [the first bailee] may recover from the second bailee. Even if the first bailee was an unpaid bailee and he passed [the object] to a paid bailee - [the first bailee is] liable, because the object's owner can say to him: I trust you to take an oath, but I don't trust [the paid bailee's oath]. Therefore, if the owner habitually deposits this object with the second bailee, the first bailee is not liable to pay, because he can say to the owner: this object that you deposited with me or lent to me last night - you used to deposit it with this person with whom I deposited it. But this is only in a case where [the bailee] does not reduce the duty of care. What is a case of reducing the duty of care? If it was deposited with him for money, and he deposited it with the second [bailee] without payment, or if he had borrowed the object, and he deposited it with the second [bailee] for money. Since [the first bailee] lowered the duty of care, he is at fault and he pays [the owner]. Even if [the first bailee] acquired the services of the object's owner for free or by paying [the owner], he has removed the deposited object from his possession to the possession of a different bailee [and must repay the owner].

Chapter 2



Chapter 3

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 A shepherd who neglected his flock and came to the city, whether at a time when it would be expected for all shepherds to come into the city, and whether it was a time when the shepherds did not go into the city, and wolves came and preyed or a lion came and mauled the sheep. We don't say "We assume if he would have been present he would have saved the flock, rather we estimate the situation; if he would have been able to save the sheep with extra shepherds and sticks he is liable, and if not he is exempt. If it is unclear if he could have done anything, he is liable for the damage.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

He who lets a house to another for an unspecified term may not dispossessed the lessee from the house unless he notifies him 30 days in advance, so as to enable him to find a place and prevent his being thrown into the street. The 30 day period is applicable only during the warm season. In the rainy season, from Sukkot to Pesach, the lessor may not dispossess the lessee.

Chapter 7



Chapter 8


The man who rents a field or an orchard to cultivate and to spend money on it, giving the landowner one-third or one-fourth of the produce, or anything they have stipulated, is called share-cropper. Whatever is spent on fencing the land, the landowner is required to pay ; and whatever is spent on extra precaution, the tenant or share-cropper is required to pay.— 

Chapter 9

The following rule applies when a person hires workers and tells them: "Get up early and work late." In a place where it is not customary for workers to get up early and work late, he cannot compel them to keep the times he desires. In a place where it is customary for an employer to provide his workers' meals, he must provide their meals. If it is customary for him to provide dried figs, dates and the like for the workers, he must. Everything follows the local custom.
When a person hires a worker and tells him: "I will pay you like any other worker in the city," we check the lowest wage paid and the highest wage paid and arrive at an average.
The following rules apply when a person tells his agent: "Go out and hire workers for me for three zuz," and the agent hires them for four. If the agent told them: "I am responsible for your wage," he must pay them four. He receives three zuz from the employer, and forfeits one zuz of his own. If he told them: "The employer is responsible for your wages," the employer should pay them according to the local custom. If there are some in that city who are hired at three and others at four, he is not required to pay them more than three. They have, however, justified complaints'3 against the agent. When does the above apply? When it cannot be determined that they invested extra effort in their work. If, however, it is obvious that they invested extra effort in their work, and it is worth four zuz, the employer must pay them four. For had the agent not told them four, they would not have worked harder and produced work that is worth four. If the employer told the agent: "Hire workers for me at four," and the agent goes and hires them at three, they receive no more than three. This applies even when their work is worth four. For they accepted the lower amount. They do, however, have a complaint against the agent. If the employer told the agent three zuz, and the agent hires them for four, but the workers say: "We will work for what the employer says," their intent is that the employer will pay them more than four zuz. Therefore, we evaluate their work. If it is worth four, they should receive four zuz from the employer. If the value of their work is not obvious or it is not worth four, they may be paid only three. If the employer told the agent to hire workers at four zuz, and he hired them at three, but they say: "We will work for what the employer says," they may be paid only three. This applies even if their work is worth four, for they heard the agent say three and agreed.
When a person hires workers and the workers hoax the employer or the employer hoaxes the workers, all they have is complaints against each other. When does the above apply? When the workers did not go to the appointed place. Different rules apply, however, if donkey drivers went to the appointed place and did not find any grain, workers went to a field and found that the ground was wet, or the employer hired workers to irrigate his field and they discovered that it was filled with water. If the owner checked the area that required work on the previous evening and saw that the workers were necessary, the workers are not entitled to any reimbursement. What could the owner have done? If, however, he did not check the land where he wants the work to be performed beforehand, he must pay them as an idle worker. For a person who comes carrying a burden cannot be compared to someone who comes empty-handed, nor can a person who performs labor be compared to someone who does not. When does the above apply? When they did not begin doing work. If, however, the worker began doing his work different rules apply. A worker may quit his work even in the middle of the day. This is derived from Leviticus 25:55: "The children of Israel are servants to Me" - i.e., to Me alone. They are not servants to servants. What is the law that applies to a worker who quits after having started work? We evaluate the work that he performed and he is paid that amount. If he is a contractor, we evaluate the work that still must be performed. Whether the price of labor was low at the time he was hired or it was not low, whether it was reduced afterwards or whether it was not reduced, we evaluate the work that must be performed. What is implied? A person agreed to harvest standing grain for two selaim. He harvested half of the grain, but left half unharvested. Similarly, a person agreed to weave a garment for two selaim. He wove half of the garment, but left half unwoven. If the remainder would cost six dinarim to complete, the original contractor is paid a shekel or he is given the option of completing his work. If the remainder was worth only two dinarim, the owner need not pay the contractor more than a sela, because he did not perform more than half the work. When does the above apply? With regard to work that does not involve an immediate loss. If, however, the work involves an immediate loss - e.g., he hired the workers to remove flax from the vat, or he hired a donkey to bring flutes for a funeral or for a wedding or the like - neither a worker nor a contractor may retract unless he is held back by forces beyond his control -e.g., he became ill or a close relative died. If the worker is not held back by forces beyond his control, and he retracts, the owner may hire others on their account or deceive them.What is meant by deceiving them? He tells them: "I agreed to pay you a sela; take two so that you will complete your work." Afterwards, he is not required to give them anything more than he originally agreed. Moreover, even if he gave them two, he can compel them to return the additional amount. What is meant by hiring others on their account? He hires other workers who complete their task so that he will not suffer a loss. Whatever he must add to pay these later workers beyond the amount the first workers agreed upon, he may take from the first workers. To what extent are the first workers responsible? For their entire wage. Moreover, if they have property that is in the employer's possession, the employer can use that property to hire workers to complete their work until he pays each worker 40 or 50 zuz a day although he originally hired the worker at three or four zuz. When does the above apply? When there are no workers available to hire at the wage to be paid the original workers. If, however, such workers are available and the original workers tell the employer: "Go out and hire from these to complete your work so that you will not suffer a loss," whether a worker or a contractor is involved, the employer has only complaints against them. To determine the wage that should be paid, we follow these guidelines: For a worker, we calculate the work he already[ performed and for a contractor, we calculate the work that must be performed.
When a person hires a worker, but [the worker is then taken to perform the king's service, the worker need not be paid for a full day's work. Instead, the employer should pay him only for the work he performed.
The following rules apply when a person hires a worker to irrigate his field from a particular river, and that river dried up in the middle of the day. If the river does not ordinarily dry up, the workers need only be paid for the work they performed. Similarly, if the inhabitants of the city frequently dam the river, and they stop its flow in the middle of the day, the workers need only be paid for the work they performed. The rationale is that the workers know the pattern of this river. If, however, the river often dries up on its own accord, the employer must pay the workers their entire wage. For it was his responsibility to inform them. If a person hires workers to irrigate a field and it rains and completes the watering of the field, the workers need only be paid for the work they performed. If a river rises and irrigates the field, they should be paid their entire wage. From heaven, they were granted help. When does the above apply? With regard to a worker. Different rules apply, however, when a person stipulates with a sharecropper that if he waters a field four times a day, he will receive half the crop, in contrast to other sharecroppers who water the field twice a day and receive a fourth of the crop. If rain comes and he does not have to draw water to irrigate the crop, he still receives half the crops, as he stipulated. The rationale is that a sharecropper is considered to be a partner, not a worker. 
The following rules apply when a person hires a worker to perform work for an entire day and he completes it in half the day. If the employer has another task that is as - or less - difficult, he may have the worker perform it for the remainder of the day. If he does not have a task for him to perform, he should pay him as an idle worker. When the worker is one who digs, labors in the field or performs heavy labor of this nature and hence will become ill if he does not work, the employer must pay him his entire wage even if he is idle.
When a person hires a worker to bring him an object from one place to another, and the worker goes to the designated place but cannot find the object specified, the employer is obligated to pay him his entire wage. If a person hires a worker to bring rods to use as supports for a vineyard, but the worker can not find them, and hence does not bring them, the employer must pay the worker his wage. If he hired him to bring cabbage or prunes for a sick person, the worker went and when he returned, the sick person either died or recovered, the employer should not tell the worker: "Take what you brought as your payment." Instead, he must pay him the entire wage he promised him. Similar principles apply in all analogous situations.
When a person hires a worker to perform work in his own field, but shows him a field belonging to a colleague and has him perform work there, he must pay him his entire wage. Afterwards, he may require his colleague to reimburse him for the benefit he received from this work.
When a person hires a worker to work together with him with straw, stubble and the like, he is not given the option of telling the worker: "Take what you did as your payment." If, however, he made such an offer, and the worker agreed, he is not given the option of changing his mind and telling the worker: "Take your wage and I will take my straw."
An ownerless object discovered by a worker belongs to him. This law applies even when the employer told him: "Work for me today." Needless to say, it applies if he told him: "Hoe for me." If, however, he hired him to take possession of ownerless objects - e.g., a river dried up and he hired him to collect the fish in a nearby marsh -whatever he finds, even a wallet filled with silver coins, belongs to the owner.

Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13







.....Just as the employer is cautioned to not steal wages from the poor and not to withhold them, so too are the poor cautioned to not "steal" from the work of his employer by being idle a little here and a little there until he has spent the whole day in deception. Rather, he is obligated to be punctilious with himself regarding time. After all (the sages) were punctilious in the matter of the fourth blessing of the grace after meals, that the employee should not recite it (so as not to take him away from his work), so too the employee is obligated to work with all his strength. Behold, Jacob the righteous said "with all my strength I worked with your father" (Genesis 31:6) he therefore received reward for it, even in this world, as it is stated "and the man profited very much" (Genesis 30:43)