Jeremiah
ירמיהו
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Jeremiah



Chapter 1



And he was in the days of Jehoiakim son of Josiah, king of Judah, until the end of eleven years of Zedekiah son of Josiah, king of Judah, until the exile of Jerusalem in the fifth month.

Chapter 2


Go and call out in the ears of Jerusalem, saying: so said the Lord: I remember to you the lovingkindness of your youth, the love of your nuptials, your following Me in the desert, in a land not sown.

Chapter 3

















At that time, they will call Jerusalem The Throne of the Lord, and all nations shall gather to it in the name of the Lord, to Jerusalem, and they shall no longer follow the idea of their evil heart.

Chapter 4



Chapter 5

Stroll in the streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in its squares, whether you will find a man, whether there is one who performs justice, who seeks faith, and I will forgive her.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9










And I will make Jerusalem heaps, a lair of jackals; and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without inhabitant.







For a sound of wailing is heard from Zion: 'O how we are ruined! We are very much ashamed, because we have left the land, because they have cast down our dwellings!' 

Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



















So said the Lord to me; Go and stand in the gate of the children of the people, in which the kings of Judah come, and out of which they go, and in all the gates of Jerusalem.







And if you will not hearken to Me to hallow the Sabbath day and not to carry burdens and to come into the gates of Jerusalem on the Sabbath, I will kindle a fire in her gates, and it will consume the palaces of Jerusalem, and it will not be quenched.

Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23





Behold, days are coming, says the Lord, when I will set up of David a righteous shoot, and he shall reign a king and prosper, and he shall perform judgment and righteousness in the land. In his days, Judah shall be saved and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his name that he shall be called, The Lord is our righteousness.









Therefore, so said the Lord of Hosts concerning the prophets: Behold I will feed them wormwood and give them poisonous water to drink, for from the prophets of Jerusalem has falseness emanated to the whole land.

Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30

















For I will bring healing to you, and of your wounds I will heal you, says the Lord, for they called you an outcast, that is Zion whom no one seeks out.
So said the Lord: Behold I am returning the captivity of the tents of Jacob, and his dwellings I will pity, and the city shall be built on its mound and the palace on its proper site shall be established.

Chapter 31






For there is a day, the watchers shall call on the mountains of Ephraim; Rise! Let us go up to Zion, to the Lord, our God.
















So said the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel; They shall yet say this thing in the land of Judah and in its cities when I return their captivity; May the Lord bless You, dwelling of righteousness, holy mount.

Chapter 32



Chapter 33















In those days and in that time I will cause to grow for David a plant of righteousness, and he shall execute justice and righteousness in the land. 
In those days, Judah shall be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell securely and this is the name that He shall call it, the Lord is our righteousness.

Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38




























And Jeremiah stayed in the prison yard until the day that Jerusalem was taken, and he was [there] when Jerusalem was taken.
