Targum Jonathan on Nahum
תרגום יונתן על נחום
F. J. Gurney, C. E. Crandall and O. O. Fletcher, "A Translation of the Targum (Jonathan) of the Prophecy of Nahum," The Hebrew Student, Oct. 1882
https://www.jstor.org/stable/3156123

Targum Jonathan on Nahum



Chapter 1

The burden [W. has <i>shadow</i>] of the cup of cursing which Nineveh is to be made to drink. First Jonah, son of Amitti, [W. inserts <i>the prophet</i>] of Gath Hepher, proph[e]sied against her, and she turned from her sins; and now that she sinned again, Nahum from the house of Koshi prophesied against her again, according as it is written in this record.
A God who is a judge and an avenger is Jehovah. An avenger is Jehovah and much power is with him. Ready is Jehovah to take vengeance upon the haters of his people, even in mighty anger upon his enemies.
Jehovah is slow to anger but much power is with him. Jehovah is ready to take vengeance [B. R. omits the foregoing clause.] but he forgives those who turn to the law; yet those who do not turn he does not fail to punish. Jehovah leads in tempest and in wind, and clouds of darkness he casts down before him.
He rebukes the sea and makes it dry, and all the rivers he dries up. Bashan is desolate and Carmel, and the trees of Lebanon droop.
The mountains tremble before him, and the hills are broken; and the earth is wasted before him, both the world and all dwellers therein.
When he reveals himself in mercy to give the law to his people, then the world trembles before him. But when he reveals himself in anger to take vengeance upon the haters of his people, before his vengeance who shall arise, and who shall bear up in the evil of his anger? His anger dissolves like fire, and the rocks are broken before him.
Good is Jehovah to Israel, to lean upon in the time of distress, and those who trust in his word are made manifest before him.
In mighty anger and in vehement wrath he will make utter destruction of the peoples who have arisen and laid waste the holy house of Jehovah, and his enemies he will deliver to Gehenna.
Ye peoples who have spoiled Israel, what are ye devising against Jehovah? An utter destruction of you he is about to make, and distress shall not arise against the house of Israel twice [W. reads, <i>and there shall not arise to you twice, as to the house of Israel, breath after distress.</i>].
Because the rulers of the people who spoiled the house of Israel, as they stagger in wine, so seduced them, and consumed them as fire consumes stubble very dry.
From thee, Nineveh comes forth a king who is devising evil against the people of Jehovah, who counsels a counsel of wickedness.
Thus saith Jehovah: Though perfect in counsel and great in number be the peoples who are assembled to afflict thee, O Jerusalem, and they cross the Tigris and pass over the Euphrates and come to afflict thee, though I have made thee serve, I will not make thee serve again.
And now I will shiver the yoke of the peoples from your necks, and your chains I will tear off.
And Jehovah will command the king of Assyria concerning thee, and there shall no more be a remembrance of thy name. From the house of thy idols I will cut off carved image and molten image. There I will make thy grave because this is a very light thing for me.

Chapter 2

Behold upon the mountains of the land of Israel [B. R. omits <i>of the land</i>] the feet of the bearer of glad tidings, the proclaimer of peace! Celebrate, O Judah, thy feasts, fulfil thy vows; because the wicked shall not pass over thee again. They are all cut off.
Those who were coming up and spreading over thy land were laying siege to thee, setting watches upon thy ways. Strengthen the neck; make strength exceedingly firm [W. reads, <i>strong of neck, exceedingly firm of strength</i>
Because Jehovah restores to Jacob his strength, to Israel his excellence; for spoilers have spoiled them and destroyed the cities of their praise.
The shields of their heroes are made red, and the men of war are in garments of scarlet. With fire the torches of their chariots are prepared for the day of their ornamentation. The leaders of their army are clothed in gorgeous apparel.
Through the streets the chariots rush madly; the sound of the clash of their arms is heard in the broad ways of the city. Their aspect is as torches, as darting lightning.
The leaders of their army are put in authority, they stumble in their goings. They hasten; they lay the wall, and they build the towers.
The bridges of the rivers are broken down and the king trembles in his palace.
The queen sitting in a sedan goes forth into captivity, and her attending maidens go after her mourning as with the sound of doves, beating upon their breasts.
Though Nineveh was like a place of the collection of waters from the days before her, yet they are fleeing. Stand! stand! but there is no one who is turning about to stand.
Plunder silver, plunder gold, and there is no end to the treasures.
Collect all desirable things. Plundered and spoiled and opened to the enemy is the gate; and hearts melting and smiting of knees and distress in all loins, and all their faces are covered with blackness, black as a pot.
Where are the habitations of the kings and the house of the dwelling of the princes, where the kings walked? There they left their sons, behold, as a lion that remains at his prey in security, and there is no one who causes alarm.
The kings brought booty to their wives and spoils to their sons, and filled their treasures with booty and their palace with spoil.
Behold I am about to send my fury upon thee, saith Jehovah of hosts, and I will burn up thy chariots with fire, and thy villages the sword shall destroy; and I will consume thy commerce from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.

Chapter 3

Woe to the city shedding blood! She is all full of lies and spoils.
The slaughter does not cease. The sound of the striking of blows and the sound of the moving of wheels, and horses prancing and chariots bounding.
Horsemen curveting, and flame and glitter of swords, and flash of spear, and a great number of slain, and a multitude of dead bodies, and there is no end to the slain; they stumble over their slain.
Because of the greatness of the din of the city, which is as a harlot, a street-walker, beautiful of grace [W. has <i>appearance</i>], knowing enchantments, that betrayeth peoples with her harlotries and kingdoms with her enchantments.
Behold I send my fury against thee, saith Jehovah of hosts, and I will uncover the shame of thy sin upon thy face, and I will show the peoples thy shame and kingdoms thy ignominy.
And I will cast upon thee filthy things and disgrace thee, and make thee vile in the eyes of every one seeing thee.
And it shall be that every one who shall see thee shall flee far from thee, and shall say: Nineveh is spoiled. Who will mourn for thee? Where shall I find comforters for thee?
Art thou then better than great Alexandria, which dwelt amid the rivers, waters all around her, whose wall was the sea, of the sea were her walls?
Ethiopia was her support, also Egypt, and there was no end. The inhabitants of Put and the Lybians were among thy helpers.
Even she went into exile as a captive; also her babes were dashed in pieces at the head of all the streets; and upon her honored men they cast the lot, and all her great men were broken down with chains.
Also thou shalt drink as a drunkard; also thou shalt seek help against the enemy.
All thy fortresses are like early figs, which, if they are shaken, fall, and there are left among them dried clusters which are fit for eating.
Behold, thy people are weak like women in the midst of thee. To thine enemies shall certainly be opened the gates of thy land, and fire shall consume thy strength.
Collect water into the midst of thee; make strong thy fortresses; multiply power; cause service to be done in the clay; strengthen thy buildings.
There the peoples that are strong shall come against thee as fire, those who kill by the sword shall consume thee. The armies of the peoples which are numerous as devouring locusts shall be assembled against thee.
They shall cover thee as the swarming locusts; they shall devastate thee as the locusts. Thou hast made thy traders more numerous than the stars of heaven. Behold they are as swarming locusts, which spread abroad and fly away.
Behold thy coins glitter as locusts, and thy satraps are as young locusts, which sit upon the walls upon a chilly day, which, when the sun breaks forth upon them, disperse, and the place whither they have fled is not known.
Broken are thy strong men, O king of Assyria. The people of thy armies are in exile. Thy people are scattered upon the mountains and there is no one gathering them.
There is no one who mourns for thy hurt. Thy wound is deadly. All who hear the report of thee shall clap their hands over thee; they rejoice, for upon whom hath not the blow of thy iniquity passed continually?