Mishneh Torah, Sanctification of the New Month
משנה תורה, הלכות קידוש החודש
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Sanctification of the New Month



Chapter 1



Chapter 2

Only two kosher men who are suitable to testify about any single thing are valid for testimony of the month. But women and slaves are like all other invalid witnesses and can't testify. A father and son that saw the moon go to court to testify. Not because testimony of the month is valid with with relatives but rather so that if one of them is found to be invalid for being a thief or such like from the list of other invalid witnesses, the second can join with another and testify. And anyone who is invalid to testify by the words of the scribes, even though he is valid according to the Torah, is invalid for testimony of the month. 
It is a law of the Torah that we are not meticulous with testimony of the month. For even if they sanctified the month via witnesses and they were found to be zomemin (witnesses who are known to have lied based on the testimony of other witnesses that proves that they couldn't have been able to witness what they claim to have seen) for this testimony, it is sanctified. As such, originally, they would accept testimony from every Israelite man, for every Israelite has a presumption that he is kosher until you know that he is invalid. From when the heretics corrupted and they'd hire men to testify that they'd seen and they hadn't seen, they amended that the court would only accept testimony of the month from witnesses that the court recognised were kosher and that they'd interrogate and investigate the testimony. 
As such, if the court do not know the witnesses that saw the moon, the men of the city that it was seen in send with the witnesses that saw the moon other witnesses that justify them to the court and inform them that these are kosher and afterwards they are accepted. 
The court calculates with the methods that the astronomers calculate with and know when the moon is seen in this month whether it will be north of the sun or southwards and whether it will be wide or short and in which direction the tips of its horns will point. And when the witnesses come to testify, we check them; "How did you see it? In the north or in the south? In which direction were its horns pointing? How high was it with the vision of your eyes and how wide was it?" If their words are found consistent with that which is known by calculation, we accept them, and if their words are not found consistent, we don't accept them.
If the witnesses said "we saw it in water" or "in clouds" or "in frost", or they saw part of it in the sky and part of it in clouds or in water or frost, this isn't a sighting and we don't sanctify based on this sighting. One says "I saw it with my eyes at a height of about two floors" and the second says "at about a height of three floors", they join up [to form valid testimony]. One says "about three floors" and the second says "about five floors", they don't join up. And we do join up one of them with a second that testifies like him or with a single floor between them. 
If they said "we saw it without intention and once we turned our attention to it and intended to see it to testify we didn't see it again", this isn't testimony and we don't sanctify based on it. Perhaps clouds gathered and they appeared like the moon and they vanished and went from them. If the witnesses said "we saw it on the 29th day of the month in the morning in the east before the sun would rise and we saw it in the evening in the west on the night of the 30th", they are believed and we sanctify based on this sighting for it was seen at its time. But the sighting that they said they saw in the morning we don't relate to for we are not responsible the morning sighting and it is known that the clouds gathered and appeared to them like the moon. And similarly, if they saw it at its time and it was not seen on the night of its pregnancy the 31st night, they are believed for we are only responsible for the 30th night sighting alone. 
How do we accept testimony of the month? Everyone who is fitting to testify that he saw the moon comes to court. And the court brings them all into one place and makes or them a large feast in order that the people will be accustomed to coming. And the pair that came first we check first with the checks we have said. We bring in the greater and ask him. If his words are consistent with the calculation, we bring his fellow. If we find their words consistent, their testimony is established. And we ask all the other pairs preliminary matters, not because we need them but rather so that they shouldn't leave with upset spirit so they will be accustomed to come. 
And afterwards, after the testimony has been established, the head of the court says "it is sanctified" and all the people respond after him "it is sanctified, it is sanctified". And we don't sanctify the month except with three judges. And we don't perform calculations except with thee judges. And we only sanctify a month that is seen at its time. And we only sanctify in the day and if they sanctified it at night, it is not sanctified. Even if the court and all of Israel saw it and the court didn't say "it is sanctified" until it became dark on the night of the 31st, or they investigated the witnesses and the court didn't manage to say "it is sanctified" until it became dark on the night of the 31st, they don't sanctify it and it will be a pregnant month one with 30 days and the first of the month will only be on the 31st even though it was visible on the 30th night. For it is not the sighting that fixes, rather it is the court saying "it is sanctified" that fixes. 
If the court itself saw it at the end of the 29th day, if there still hasn't emerged a star of the night of the 30th, the court says "it is sanctified, it is sanctified", for it is still day. And if they saw it on the night of the 30th after two stars emerged, on the next day, we sit two judges with one of them that saw it at night and the two others testify before the three judges and the three sanctify it. 
A court which sanctifies the month, whether by accident, whether they were mistaken, whether they were forced, it is sanctified and everyone is obligated to fix the festivals on the day they sanctified. Even though one knows that they made a mistake, he is obligated to rely on them for the matter is only given over to them and the one who commanded to keep the festivals is the one who commanded to rely on them as it is said (Leviticus 23:2) "that you call them…".

Chapter 3

Witnesses that see the month, if there is between them and the location of the court a distance of a night and day's journey or less, they go and testify. And if there is between them more than this, they don't go for their testimony after the 30th day doesn't help since the month has already been made pregnant (into a 30 day month).
Witnesses that saw the month go to the court to testify, even on Shabbat, as it is said (Leviticus 23:4) "that you call them at their appointed time" and anywhere it is said "appointed time" the Shabbat is pushed off. Thus, we only violate the Shabbat for the first of the month of Nissan which contains the festival of Passover and for the first of the month of Tishrei which contains the festivals of the Day of Atonement and Tabernacles in order to fix the festivals which are described with the term "appointed time". And in a time when the Holy Temple exists, we violate the Shabbat for all the months because of the additional sacrifice of every first of the month which pushes off the Shabbat. 
Just as the witnesses that saw the month desecrate the Shabbat, so too the witnesses who justify them to the court desecrate with them if the court doesn't recognise the ones who saw. And even if the one who informs the court of them is a single witness, he goes with them and desecrates in case he will find another and join up with him.
[If] the witness that saw the month on the night of Shabbat was ill, we ride him on a donkey and even on a bed. And if there is an ambush on the way, the witnesses take weapons in their hands. And if it was a far way, they they take food in their hands. And even if they saw it large and visible to all, they shouldn't say "just as we saw it, others saw it and we don't need to desecrate the Shabbat", rather anyone who sees the month and will be fitting to testify and there will be between him and the location where the court is fixed a night and a day's [journey] or less has a commandment upon him to desecrate the Shabbat and to go and testify.
At first, they'd accept testimony of the month the entire 30th day. One time, the witnesses delayed in coming until the late afternoon and they ruined [the service] in the Temple and didn't know what to do; whether they should do the afternoon elevation offering, perhaps the witnesses would come and it is impossible to bring up the additional [offering] of the day [of the first of the month] after the afternoon continual offering. The court arose and amended that they would only accept witnesses of the month until [the time of] minchah in order that there would be sufficient time in the day to bring up the additional [offering] and afternoon continual [offering] and their libations. 
And if minchah arrived and witnesses did not come, they'd do the afternoon continual [offering]. And if witnesses came from minchah an onwards, they treat that day as holy and the morrow as holy and they bring the additional [offering] on the morrow, since they didn't sanctify it after minchah. From when the Temple was destroyed, Rabban Yochanan ben Zakkai and his court amended that they'd accept testimony of the month the entire day and even if witnesses came on the 30th day at the end of the day close to sunset, they accept their testimony and sanctify only the 30th day. 
When the court makes the month pregnant (30 days) because witnesses didn't come the entire 30th day, they'd go up to a prepared place and they'd make a feast on the 31st day which is the first of the month. And they don't go up to there at night, rather at first light, before sunrise, and they don't go up to this feast with less than 10 [people]. And they only go up with grain bread and legumes and they eat these at the time of the feast. And this is the meal of the commandment of impregnating the month that is said in every place.
At first, when the court would sanctify the month, they'd burn bonfires on the tops of the mountains in order to inform those who were far away. Once the Cutites ruined it, for they'd light bonfires in order to cause the people to err, they amended that messengers would go out and they'd inform the public. And these messengers do not desecrate the holidays and there is no need to say Shabbat, for we don't desecrate Shabbat to establish it [the month], rather only to sanctify it. 
For 6 months the messengers would go out. For Nissan because of Passover. And for Av because of the fast (the 9th of Av). And for Elul because of Rosh Hashanah, in order that they'd sit in anticipation on the 30th day of Elul, if they'd be informed that the court had sanctified the 30th day, they'd treat that day alone as holy, and if they weren't informed, they'd keep the 30th day holy and the 31st day holy until the messengers of Tishri would come to them. And for Tishri because of fixing the festivals. And for Kislev because of Chanukah. And for Adar because of the Purim. And in the time when the Holy Temple exists, they even go out for Iyar because of Passover Minor. 
The messengers of Nissan and the messengers of Tishri only go out on the day of the first of the month after the sun will rise, [waiting] until after they have heard from the mouth of court "it is sanctified". And if the court sanctifies at the end of the 29th day as we have said and they heard from the court "it is sanctified", they go out in the evening. And the messengers of the other 6 months can go out in the evening after the moon has been seen, even though the court is yet to sanctify the month. Since the month has been seen, they go out, for tomorrow the court will certainly sanctify it.
Every place that the messengers reach, they'd make the festivals a one day holiday as is written in the Torah. And the distant places that the messengers wouldn't reach would make two days because of the doubt, for they wouldn't know which day was the day that the court fixed the first of the month. 
There are places that the messengers of Nissan would reach them and the messengers of Tishri would not reach them. And according to the law, they ought to make Passover one day of holiday, for the messengers reached them and they knew on which day the first of the month was fixed. And they ought to make the holiday of the festival of Tabernacles two days, for the messengers didn't reach them. And in order not to distinguish between the festivals, the sages amended that any place that the messengers of Tishri didn't reach would make two days [of holidays], even the holiday of Ceasing (Shavuot). 
And how much is between the messengers of Tishri and the messengers of Nissan? Two days. For the messengers of Tishri didn't travel on the 1st of Tishri because it is a holiday and not on the 10th of it because it is the Day of Atonement.
The messengers do not need to be two, rather even one is believed. And not only a messenger alone but even a merchant from the rest of the populace that comes on his way and says "I heard from the mouth of the court that they sanctified the month on a particular day" is believed and they fix the festivals by his mouth. For this matter is something which is prone to be revealed and a single kosher witness is believed for it.
[If] the court sat all of the 30th day and witnesses didn't come, and they awoke at first light and impregnated the month as we have explained in this chapter. And after 4 or 5 days, distant witnesses come and they testify that they saw the month at its time which is the night of the 30th. And even if they come at the end if the month. They intimidate them very threateningly and they hassle them with questions and they bother them with checks and they are meticulous with their testimony and the court attempts to not sanctify this month since its name of pregnant has gone out.
And if the witnesses stand with their testimony and it is found consistent and the witnesses are known and intelligent men and the testimony has been appropriately investigated. They sanctify it and retract and count for that month from the 30th day since the moon was seen on its night. 
And if the court need to leave this month pregnant as it was before these witnesses came, they leave it. And this is what they said "we impregnate the month for necessity". And there are amongst the great sages those who argue on this matter and say we never impregnate the month for necessity; since witnesses came, we sanctify and don't intimidate them. 
It appears to me that there is only an argument amongst the sages  for the months other than Nissan and Tishri. Or with witnesses of Nissan and Tishri that came after the festivals had passed. For what has been done has been done and the time of the offerings and the time of the festivals has passed. But if the witnesses came in Nissan and Tishri before half of the month, we accept their testimony and we don't intimidate them at all. For we don't intimidate witnesses that testify about the month that it was seen at its time to impregnate it.
But we intimidate witnesses who's testimony has become ruined and the matter is tending such that the testimony will not stand and the month will become impregnated. We intimidate them in order that the testimony will stand and the month will be sanctified at its time. And similarly, if witnesses come to disprove the witnesses that saw it at its time before the court have sanctified it, we intimidate the disproving witnesses until their disproof doesn't stand and the month is sanctified at its time.

Chapter 4

A leap year is a year in which another month has been added. And we only ever add an Adar and make two Adars, an Adar Rishon (first Adar) and an Adar Sheini (Second Adar). And why do we add this month? Because of the spring time, so that the Passover will fall at that time, as it is said (Deuteronomy 16:1) "Guard the month of the spring", that this month should be in the spring. And if it wasn't for the addition of this month, Passover would sometimes come in the days of the sun (the summer) and sometimes in the days of the rain (the winter).
For three indicators we make the year a leap [year]. For the epoch and for the spring and for the fruit of the trees. How? The court calculates and knows; if the epoch of Nissan (when the sun enters Aries) will be on the 16th of Nissan or after this time, they make the year into a leap [year]. And they make that Nissan an Adar Sheini in order that the Passover will be in the spring time. And on this indicator, we rely and make leap [years] and we are not concerned about another indicator. 
And similarly, if the court saw that the spring has yet to arrive, rather it is still dark. And the fruit of the trees that tend to sprout around Passover have not sprouted. We rely on these two indicators and make the year a leap [year]. So that the spring will be present to offer up from it the waved omer (an offering of grain) on the 16th of Nissan. And in order that the fruit will sprout normally throughout the spring time. 
And we rely on three lands with respect to the spring. On the land of Yehuda and on the Jordan Bank and in the Galil. And if the spring arrived in two of these lands and in one it didn't, we don't make it a leap [year]. And if it arrived in one of them and it didn't arrive in two, we make it a leap [year], if the fruit of the trees is yet to sprout. And these are the main things that we make leap [years] for in order that the years will be solar years. 
And there exist other things that the court makes leap [years] for due to necessity. And these are they: Because of the roads that are not mended and the people are unable to go up [to Jerusalem], we make the year a leap [year] until the rain stops and the roads are mended. And because of the bridges which were demolished and the rivers are found blocking and preventing the people or they are endangering themselves and dying, we make the year a leap [year] until they mend the bridges. And because of the passover ovens that were destroyed in the rain and they don't have place to roast their passover [offerings], we make the year a leap [year] until they will have built the ovens and they will have dried. And because of the Israelite exiles that have been uprooted from their place and are yet to have arrived in Jerusalem, we make the year a leap [year] in order that they will have enough time to arrive.
But we don't make the year a leap [year], not for the snow and not for the cold and not for the Israelite exiles that are yet to be uprooted from their place. And not for the ritual impurity. For example, were the majority of the congregation or the majority of the priests ritually impure, we don't make the year a leap [year] in order that they will have enough time to purify themselves and do [the offerings] in purity, rather they do in impurity. And if they made the year a leap [year] because of the impurity, it is a leap [year]. 
There are things for which we don't make a leap [year] at all but we make them a support for a year that needs to become a leap [year] because of the epoch or because of the spring and the fruits of the trees. And these are they: Because of the goats and sheep that are yet to be born or which are few. And because of the chicks that haven't flown. We don't make a leap [year] because of these, in order that the goats and sheep should be accessible for the passover [offerings] and the chicks accessible for the Re'iah [offering] or for those who are obligated in a bird offering. But we make them a support for the year. 
How do we make them a support for the year? We say "this year needs making into a leap [year] because of the epoch that has dragged" or "because of the spring and the fruit of the trees that are yet to arrive and further for the goats are small and the chicks are delicate."
We only make the year a leap [year] with those invited to. How? The head of the high court says to so-and-so and so-and-so from the Sanhedrin (the high court) "you are invited to location so-and-so where we will calculate and see and know whether this year needs making into a leap [year] or doesn't need it. And those who were invited alone are the ones that make it into a leap [year]. And with how many do we make it a leap [year]? We start with three judges from the great Sanhedrin, from those that were ordained. Two said "let's not sit and let's not see whether making a leap [year] is necessary or if not" and one says "let's sit and check", the individual is nullified in his minority. Two said "let's sit and check" and one says "let's not sit", we add two from the those invited and debate the matter back and forth. 
Two say "it requires making into a leap [year]" and three say "it doesn't require it". The two are nullified in their minority. Three say "it requires making into a leap [year]" and two say "it doesn't require making into a leap [year]", they add two from those invited and they debate back and forth with seven. If they all conclude to make a leap [year] or not to make a leap [year], they do as they do as they concluded. And if they argue, they go after the majority, whether to make a leap [year] or whether not to make a leap [year]. And the head of the high court, who is the head of the seating of the seventy-one, needs to be amongst the seven. And if they concluded with three to make a leap [year], it is a leap [year] so long as the prince is with them or he wants. And with making the year a leap [year], we start from the side. And to sanctify the month, we start with the greatest. 
We don't sit for making the year a leap [year] either a king or a kohen gadol (high priest). A king because of his soldiers and his wars, perhaps his opinion will be be biased because of them to make a leap [year] or not a leap [year]. And a kohen gadol because of the cold, perhaps his opinion will be biased to not make a leap [year] in order that Tishrei will not come in the cold days and he immerses on the Day of Atonement five immersions.
[If] the head of the high court, and he is the one called prince, is on a far journey, we don't make it a leap [year] except under the condition of if the prince wants it. [If] he comes and wants, it is a leap [year], [if] he doesn't want, it is not a leap [year]. And we don't make a leap [year] except in the land of Yehudah for the Shechina (divine presence) is there as it said (Deuteronomy 12:5) "for his dwelling you will seek". And if they made it a leap [year] in the Galil, it is a leap [year]. And we only make it a leap [year] in the day. And if they made it a leap [year] at night, it is not a leap [year]. 
The court is able to calculate and to know which years will be leap [years] at any time they want, even several years. But they don't say "year such-and-such is a leap [year]", rather after Rosh Hashanah they say "this year is a leap [year]". And this matter is [only] because of pressure but at a time when there is no pressure, we don't inform that it is a leap [year after Rosh Hashanah], rather in Adar they say "this year is a leap [year] and the coming month is not Nissan but rather Adar Sheini". [If] they said before Rosh Hashanah "this entering year is a leap [year]", it is not a leap [year] with this statement. 
[If] the 30th day of Adar arrived and they were yet to make the year a leap [year], they don't make it a leap [year] at all. For that day is fitting to be the first if the month of Nissan and once Nissan has entered and they haven't made it a leap [year], they are not able to make a leap [year]. And if they made it a leap [year] on the 30th day of Adar, it is a leap [year]. [If] witnesses come after they made it a leap [year] and they testify on the moon, they sanctify the month on the 30th day and it will be the first of the month of Adar Sheini. And if they sanctify it before they make the year a leap [year], they can no longer make a leap [year] for we don't make leap [years] in Nissan. 
We don't make the year a leap [year] in a year of famine, for everyone runs to the granaries to eat and to live and it is impossible to add for them time to forbid the new [produce] (which will only become permissible on the 16th of Nissan). And we don't make a leap [year] in the shvi'it (the seventh year of the agricultural cycle), for everyone's hand is controlling the undergrowth, and we won't find [grain] for the omer offering and the two loaves [offering]. And they were used to making a leap [year] on the eve of shvi'it. 
It seems to me that this that the sages said "we don't make a leap [year] in years of famine and shvi'it", is that we don't make a leap [year] because of the necessity of the roads and the bridges and such like. But if the year was fitting to be made a leap [year] because of the epoch or because of the spring and the fruit of the trees, we always make a leap [year] at any time. 
When the court makes the year a leap [year], they write letters for all the distant places and they inform them that it has been made a leap [year] and for what reason it was made a leap [year]. And with the language of the prince they are written. And it says to them "it is known to you that I and my colleagues have agreed and we have added on this year such and such". [If] they want, 29 days, [if] they want, 30 days. For the leap [year] month, the court has the authority to add a full [month] or a lacking [month] for the people who are far away when they inform them. But they themselves go according to the sighting, if full or if lacking. 

Chapter 5

Everything we have said about fixing the first of the month by sight and making the year a leap [year] because of the time or for necessity is only done by the Sanhedrin (High Court) that is in the land of Israel or an ordained court in the land of Israel that has been given permission from the Sanhedrin. For such was said to Moses and Aaron, (Exodus 12:2) "this month is for you the first month", and according to tradition they learnt, man from man from Moses our master, that such is the explanation of the matter: this testimony will be given over to you and to all who stand after you in your place. But at a time when the Sanhedrin doesn't exist in the land of Israel, we don't fix months and we don't make leap years except with the calculations that we calculate today.
And this matter is a law of Moses from Sinai. That at a time that there is a Sanhedrin, we fix by the sighting, and when the Sanhedrin doesn't exist, we fix by this calculation that we calculate today and we don't relate to the sighting. Rather, sometimes the day we fix with this calculation will be the day of sighting, or a day before, or a day after. And that it will be after the sighting by a day is a wonder (i.e. very rare), and [this is so] in lands that are to the west of the land of Israel. 
And from when did all of Israel start to calculate with this calculation? From the end of the sages of the Talmud, at the time that the land of Israel was made desolate and there didn't remain there a fixed court. But in the days of the sages of the Mishnah and similarly in the days of the sages of the Talmud, until the days of Abaye and Rava, they'd rely on the fixing of the land of Israel. 
When the Sanhedrin existed and they fixed based on the sighting, the children of the land of Israel (those who lived in Israel) and all the places that would be reached by the messengers of Tishrei would make the holidays one day only. And the remaining distant places that the messengers of Tishrei wouldn't reach would make two days due to doubt, for they wouldn't know the day that the children of the land of Israel fixed the month on. 
In this time that the Sanhedrin doesn't exist and the court of the land of Israel fixes on this calculation, it should have been according to the law that in all places, they would only make one day holiday, even the distant places that are in the outside of the land [of Israel], like the children of the land of Israel. For everyone relies and fixes based on one calculation. But it is an amendment of the sages that they be careful with the custom of their fathers that is in their hands. 
Therefore, any place that the messengers of Tishri didn't arrive at when the messengers went out will make two days, even at this time, as they did in the times when the children of the land of Israel would fix based on the sighting. And the children of the land of Israel in this time make one day according to their custom for they never made two days. It is found, the second [day of] holiday that we make in the exile at this time originates from the words of the scribes that amended this matter. 
[Regarding] the holiday of Rosh Hashanah at the time when they fix based on the sighting, the majority of the children of the land of Israel would make it two days out of doubt. For they would not know on which day the court fixed the month for the messengers don't go out on the holiday. 
And not only such but even in Jerusalem itself, which is the place of the court, many times they'd make the holiday of Rosh Hashanah two days. For if the witnesses didn't come all of the 30th day, they'd treat that day that the witnesses were anticipated as holy and the morrow holy. And since they'd make it two days and even at the time of the sighting, [as such] they amended that even the children of the land of Israel would always make it two days at this time that we fix based on the calculation. Behold, you have learnt that even the second [day of] holiday of Rosh Hashanah at this time originates from the words of the scribes. 
Making one day of holiday is not dependent on the closeness of the place. How? If there will be a place, between it and between Jerusalem a journey of 5 days or less so that with certainty it would have been possible  that the messengers would arrive there, we don't say that the people of this place make one [day] holiday. For who says to us that the messengers would go out to this place? Perhaps the messengers wouldn't go out to this place because there wasn't an Israelite there, and after they returned to fix based on the calculation, Israelites settled there that are obligated to make two days. Or because there was a siege on the way, like the way that was between Yehuda and Galil in the days of the sages of the Mishnah. Or because there were non-jews blocking the messengers to pass between them. 
And were the matter to depend on the closeness of the place, all the children (inhabitants) of Egypt would make one day. For it is possible that the messengers of Tishrei would arrive there. For there is only between Jerusalem and Egypt via Ashkelon a journey of 8 days or less, and similarly the majority of Syria. Behold, you have learnt that the matter is not dependent on the place's being close. 
It is found that the root of this matter on this way is such: Any place that has between it and between Jerusalem a journey greater than 10 complete days makes two day always like their custom from before. For the messengers of every single Tishrei would only reach a place that has between it and between Jerusalem a journey of 10 days or less. And any place that has between it and between Jerusalem a journey equal to 10 days or less, [such] that it is possible that the messengers of Tishrei would reach it, we see if that place was from [a part of] the land of Israel that had in it [people of] Israel at the time of the sighting in the second conquering [of the land], like Usha and Shaphram and Lod and Yavneh and Nov and Tiberius and such like, they make only one day alone. And if that place was from Syria, like Tyre and Damascus, and Ashkelon and such like, or from the outside of the land [of Israel], like Egypt and Amon and Moav and such like, they do like the custom of their fathers in their hands, if one day, one day, and if two days, two days. 
A place that has between it and between Jerusalem 10 days or less than 10, and it is [in] Syria or the outside of the land [of Israel], and they don't have a custom. Or it is a newly formed city in the desert of the land of Israel. Or a place that [people of] Israel dwells now. They make two days like the custom of the majority of the world. And every second day holiday is from the words of the scribes and even the second day of the holiday of Rosh Hashanah which everyone makes at this time.
This that we calculate at this time, every single one in his city, and we say "the first of the month will be on day so-and-so and the holiday will be on day so-and-so, it is not with our calculation that we fix it and we do not rely on it. For we don't make years leap [years] and we don't fix months in the outside of the land [of Israel]. And we only rely on rely on the calculation of the children of the land of Israel and their fixing. And this that we calculate is only to reveal the matter. Since we know that on this calculation they rely, we calculate to know the day that the children of the land of Israel fixed it, whichever day it is. And via the fixing of the children of the land of Israel, it is it that the first of the month or the holiday will be. Not because of the calculation that we calculate.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7

We never set the New Month of Tishrei according to this calculation on the first day toward Sabbath (Sunday), the fourth day toward Sabbath (Wednesday), or the day before Sabbath (Friday). And a menmonic for them is "ADU" (1,4,6). Instead, when the <i>molad</i> (new moon time) for Tishrei is on one of these days, we set the New Month on the day after it. How so? Supposing the <i>molad</i> was on the first day toward Sabbath, we set the New Month of Tishrei on the second day (Monday). And if the <i>molad</i> was on the fourth day toward Sabbath, we set the New Month on the fifth day (Thursday). And if the <i>molad</i> was on the sixth day toward Sabbath, we set the New Month on the seventh day (Saturday).