Divrei Chalomot
דברי חלומות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Divrei Chalomot



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21

Saturday evening after Shabbat Beshalach, I was doubtful about a dream. It was about what is in Yevamot 37a, the doubt of whether a child is a 9-month baby to the first husband or a 7-month baby to the levir, for one child would be kosher and the other a doubtful mamzer. Since we see that the first baby is modest and excellent, and the second is known by its blossoming and by its sins from its suckling era, that it is brazen like many mamzerim, who are rebels and sinners. If we rely on this ruling to establish a chazaka, for the child to be like a certain mamzer. And logically, it seems simple that we don't rely, since there are many brazen in the world who are not mamzerim, and "at the footsteps of Mashach, cheek will be common", and therefore many wicked will be wicked from the womb. And although they are sons of one father and mother, if the first is the child of the levir, Ya'akov and Esav struggled and were twins! And the sons of totally righteous parents! And all the more so, those who are not twins and are the children of general people. And perhaps the second is a of the nine attributes mentioned in Nedarim 20b, etc. Rather, it's proper to pay attention to the fact of Rabbi Bena'ah in Bava Batra 58a, who relied on an experiment to establish the brazen as mamzerim even in a case of money. And it's necessary to say, even though in a case of money we don't go after a chazaka, that's only to remove money from a chazaka. Rather, one can say that it's certain that nine of the sons were mamzerim, so there's certainly a mamzer present. And without this, the father willed that the one would inherit and didn't specify who, so against your will you have to submit to the wisdom of the beit din who will clarify the matter with their wisdom. One can also say that Ketubot 85b is similar to this, where someone willed their possessions to Toviyah and two Toviyahs came forwards, that the judges pay attention to the likelihood of the deceased's intent being to which one, see Rashi there. And I also saw the Rashbam wrote in Bava Batra as I wrote, see there, with this words to this one... that the beit din will explain... and these words said... and R Bena'ah judged well, that this is only appropriate for <i>shuda</i> [a case with two creditors only one of whom can be paid, where the beit din is able to select one of them to be paid]. But, when I did not know why I should follow after chariots, and brought proof for <i>shuda dedaynei</i> from the Ketubot which was mentioned earlier, according to which I first wrote that his intent was to whichever the beit din should select. If so, it's certain that the beit din should select accordng to their wisdom and logic, for they are not prophets to know who the deceased intended - and he himself did not know, and said it without explanation! It's impossible for anyone to know, and so the matter is handed over to the beit din. And those who informed on Rav Bena'ah and said that he was fining people without witnesses (Bava Batra 58a), were just saying lashon hara, for he didn't fine anyone! Behold, the father said clearly that only one should receive money - and the matter was weighed, and you must admit that he intended this. And with regard to Ketubot 85a, he knew which Toviyah he intended, but since one can say that he forgot and didn't conclude in his mind, thus his wealth goes to the other Toviyah - he needed to signal this and single him out, and there's no proof that he gave to the beit din! In any case, they said that this is <i>shuda dedaynei</i> and this is an expansion, which is necessary to teach us there. But here, where it is simple - for behold, the matter is surrendered to the beit din and they will clarify his words, as I have written. And it seems from this to prove the opposite - for if the matter wasn't <i>shuda dedaynei</i> then he would not have judged well, and we would not have relied on his estimate as discussed. And since one could say it's different there, where he is not so brazen, for behold Rav Bena'ah commanded them to do such [beat their father's grave] and they did so at the command of the beit din! And it's possible that even the kosher one would do this. And what was written at the start, with the <i>dibbur hamatchil</i> "chavoto", that mamzerim are brazen and will beat it, there it is certain that they will do it, but the kasher will perhaps not wish to even though he is commanded, and so we can rely on this, as it is just <i>shuda</i> and not a true estimate.