Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Intercourse
משנה תורה, הלכות איסורי ביאה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah,_Forbidden_Intercourse
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13

1. There are three ways in which someone enters the covenant: by circumcision, by immersion, and by a Temple offering.
2. Circumcision as it was in Egypt, as it says, "Every uncircumcised person shall not eat of it (the Passover offering)."  Moses our teacher circumcised them and everyone spurned the covenant in Egypt with the exception of the Tribe of Levi.  On this it says, "Your covenant was withheld."
3. Immersion was in the desert before receiving the Torah, as is said, "Sanctify yourselves today and tomorrow; wash your clothes."  The offering, as is said, "Send the young ones of Israel to bring elevation offerings" - and everyone in Israel brought them.
4. Throughout the generations, any non-Jew who wants to enter the covenant and come in under the 'wings of the Presence of God' accepts upon him or herself the yoke of Torah - he needs circumcision, immersion and a Temple offering.  If female, she needs only immersion and an offering, as is said "As for you, so for the foreigner."  That's to say, just as you (entered via) circumcision, immersion and an offering, so too the foreigner (shall enter via) circumcision, immersion and an offering.
5. What's a convert's offering?  An elevation offering or two doves or two turtledoves (and the two are considered an offering).  At this time in history where there are no offerings, one needs (merely) circumcision and immersion.  Once the Temple is built, one will bring an offering.

Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21

Anyone who sleeps with one of the forbidden relationships "by way of limbs", or who hugs and kisses in a sexual way and takes pleasure in physical intimacy, receives lashes for a d'Oraisa transgression, as it says (Leviticus 18:30) "do not do any of these abominable customs etc" and it says (Leviticus 18:6) "do not approach to uncover nakedness", which is to say do not approach things which will bring you to transgressing Arayos.
One who engages in these behaviours is suspected of committing Arayos. And it's forbidden for a person to intimate with his hands or feet or to hint with his eyes to any of the Arayos or to laugh with her or to engage in light-headedness. And even to smell her perfume or to gaze at her beauty is forbidden. And one who engages in this deliberately receives lashes of rebelliousness. And one who gazes even at the little finger of a woman intending to derive sexual pleasure is comparable to one who looks at her genitalia. And even to hear the voice of an Ervah or to look at her hair is forbidden.