Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Intercourse
משנה תורה, הלכות איסורי ביאה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Forbidden Intercourse



Chapter 1



Chapter 2







Cuando una persona consagra a una mujer, sus parientes cercanas - seis mujeres - se le vuelven prohibidas como una ervah para siempre. Esto se aplica tanto si consuma [el vínculo a través de nisuin] como si se divorcia de ella, durante la vida de su esposa y después de su muerte. Ellas son: a) su madre, b) la madre de su madre, c) la madre de su padre, d) su hija, e) la hija de su hija, y f) la hija de su hijo. Si tiene relaciones con una de estas mujeres durante la vida de su esposa, ambos [él y ella] son ejecutados por quemadura.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11















Similarly, you find that in some places--and you find [this also supported by] responsa of some Geonim--that a woman who gives birth to a male should not have sexual relations until the end of the forty [days after birth], or until the end of the eighty [days after birth] for a woman who gives birth to a female, even though she saw blood only in the seven days [after giving birth]. This custom is just an error in those responsa and [this practice] is [an act of] heresy in those places. They learned this practice from the <i>Tzadokim</i>. It is a <i>mitzvah</i> to compel them to remove [this practice] from their hearts and to return them to the words of the Sages who [required that] she should count only seven "clean" days, as we explained.

Chapter 12

If a Jewish person sleeps with a non-Jew in the way of married people, they receive biblically ordained lashes, as it says “You shall not intermarry with them: do not give your daughter to their sons or take their daughters for your sons.” (Deuteronomy 7:3) The same law is true concerning the seven nations of the land of Canaan and all other nations. This is also explained by Ezra, “We will not give our daughters in marriage to the peoples of the land, or take their daughters for our sons.” (Nehemiah 10:31) 











i.e. The illegitimate children of a Hebrew servant and Caanite maid-servant are not considered Jews. Because of this, his father's seed was wasted because it did not go toward the birth of another Jew. This is said in  Deuteronomy 23:18, "No Israelite man or woman shall become a temple prostitute."

Chapter 13

There are three ways in which someone enters the covenant: by circumcision, by immersion, and by a Temple offering.
Circumcision as it was in Egypt, as it says, "Every uncircumcised person shall not eat of it (the Passover offering)."  Moses our teacher circumcised them and everyone spurned the covenant in Egypt with the exception of the Tribe of Levi.  On this it says, "Your covenant was withheld."
Immersion was in the desert before receiving the Torah, as is said, "Sanctify yourselves today and tomorrow; wash your clothes."  The offering, as is said, "Send the young ones of Israel to bring elevation offerings" - and everyone in Israel brought them.
Throughout the generations, any non-Jew who wants to enter the covenant and come in under the 'wings of the Presence of God' accepts upon him or herself the yoke of Torah - he needs circumcision, immersion and a Temple offering.  If female, she needs only immersion and an offering, as is said "As for you, so for the foreigner."  That's to say, just as you (entered via) circumcision, immersion and an offering, so too the foreigner (shall enter via) circumcision, immersion and an offering.
What's a convert's offering?  An elevation offering or two doves or two turtledoves (and the two are considered an offering).  At this time in history where there are no offerings, one needs (merely) circumcision and immersion.  Once the Temple is built, one will bring an offering.
A convert who was circumcised and has not immersed, or has immersed and not circumcised is not a convert until he is circumcised and immersed. And it is necessary to immerse before three (men). And since the matter requires a Beit Din (counsel) - no immersion is done on the Sabbath, nor Yom Tov (holiday) nor at night. And if he was immersed, he is a convert.
A minor convert - is immersed upon the knowledge of Beit Din (counsel), because it is in his interest. A pregnant woman who converts and immerses - her child does not need immersion. If he immersed in front of only himself, and converted to himself, or even in front of two, he is not a convert. If he comes and say "I converted in the Beit Din of so and so and they immersed me" - he is not trusted to come into the community until he brings witnesses. 
If he married an Israelite woman or a convert and he has children, and he says “I converted myself”, he is trusted to disqualify himself, but not to disqualify his children. And he immerses again before a beit din.

Chapter 14

How do we accept righteous converts? When one comes to convert from being a Gentile and they examine him and they do not find any ulterior motive, they say to him: What did you see that made you want to convert? Don't you know that Israel in these times is rejected, swept away, disturbed, and afflictions come on them. If he says, "I know, and I am not worthy" they accept him immediately. 
And they inform him of the main principles of the religion, which is the unification of God's name, and the prohibition of idol worship, and they dwell at length on this matter. And they inform him of some of the lenient commandments, and some of the stringent commandments. And they do not dwell at length on this. And they let him know the sin of “gatherings” “forgotten sheaves” “corners of the field” and “second tithe.” And they tell him of the punishments for not keeping the commandments. How so? They say to him: Know that before this point, if you ate forbidden suet, you would not be punished with karet, if you broke Shabbat, you would not be punished by being stoned. But now, after you have converted, if you eat forbidden fat you will be punished with karet, if you break Shabbat, you will be punished by being stoned. And they do not dwell at length on this, nor do they go into detail, lest this causes him to be troubled and turn away from the good path to the evil path. For at the beginning we do not draw a person except with words of appeasement and gentleness.  I drew them with human ties, with cords of love. 
And just as they inform them of the punishment for keeping commandments so too they inform them of the reward of mitzvoth, and they inform them that by doing these mitzvoth they will earn the world to come, and that no one is perfectly righteous person except for one who is a master of wisdom, who performs these commandments and knows them. 
And they say to him: Know that the world to come is hidden only for the righteous, and this is Israel. And the reason that Israel is in pain in this world, it is a good hidden for them for they cannot accept too much goodness in this world, like the other nations, lest they get haughty, and go astray and they lose the reward of the world to come, as it says, "So Jeshurun grew fat and kicked."
And God does not bring on them an abundance of punishment so that they will not be lost. Rather, all of the nations of the world are finished off, and they will remain. And they go on at length about this matter, in order to endear it to them. If he retracts and does not want to accept, he can go on his way. And if he accepts, they do not delay him. Rather they circumcise him immediately. And if he was already circumcised they spill some covenantal blood, and they delay him until he fully heals, and then they immerse him. 

Chapter 15

1. What is meant by the Torah's prohibition (Deut. 23:3) against relations with a mamzer? [The term refers to a person conceived from] a forbidden sexual relationship. A niddah is an exception. A son conceived from such relationships is blemished, but is not a mamzer. When, however, a man enters into any other forbidden sexual relationships, whether through rape, or willingly, whether conscious of the prohibition or not, the offspring produced is a mamzer. Both male and female [mamzerim] are forbidden forever, as [Deuteronomy 23:3] states: "[A mamzer shall not enter Gd's congregation.] Also the tenth generation...," i.e., [the prohibition is] everlasting.
2. When a mamzer marries a Jewish women or a Jewish man marries a female mamzer, once they enter into relations after consecration, they are punished by lashes. If the man consecrates the woman, but does not enter into relations, he does not receive lashes. If they enter into relations without consecration, they do not receive lashes because of relations with a mamzer. For the only instance where relations that involve a negative prohibition incur the punishment of lashes without the woman being consecrated is relations between a High Priest and a widow, as will be explained. When a man remarries his divorcee after she married another person, the offspring are acceptable. For she is not considered an ervah.
3. When a gentile or a servant enter into relations with a Jewish woman, the child is acceptable. [This applies] whether the woman is unmarried or married, whether she was raped or engaged in relations willingly. When a gentile or a servant enter into relations with a female mamzer, the offspring is a mamzer. When a mamzer enters into relations with a female gentile, the offspring is a gentile. If [the child] converts, he is fit to marry within the Jewish people like other converts. If [a mamzer] enters into relations with a maid-servant, the offspring is a servant. If he is freed, the offspring is acceptable like other freed servants. He may marry a Jewish woman.
4. This is the general principle: When a child is born from a servant, a gentile, a maid-servant, or a female gentile, he is like his mother. We are not concerned with the father. For this reason, [the Sages] permitted a mamzer to marry a maid-servant to purify the lineage of his descendants. For he can free them and they will be free men. [Our Sages] did not ordain a decree forbidding a maid-servant to a mamzer, so that he can legitimize his sons.
5. When a person who is half a servant and half a freed man engages in relations with a married woman, a son born of that relationship has no way of legitimizing [his marriage relationships], because the dimension of him which is a mamzer and the dimension of him which is an acceptable Jew are intermingled. Therefore he is forbidden to engage in relations with a maid-servant and his offspring share his status forever.
6. When a gentile engages in relations with a maid-servant who immersed herself, the offspring are servants. When a servant who immersed himself engages in relations with a female gentile, the offspring are gentile. He is given his mother's status. When, however, a gentile engages relations with a gentile maid-servant or a gentile servant engages relations with a gentile woman, the status of the offspring follows that of the father.
7. A mamzer may marry a female convert and a female mamzer may marry a male convert, the offspring of both relationships are mamzerim. For the status of the offspring follows that of the blemished one. [The license for such a marriage is derived from] the verse: "[A mamzer shall not enter] God's congregation." (Deut. 23:3) The congregation of converts is not considered as "God's congregation." (ibid)
8. When a female convert marries a male convert and gives birth to a son, he is permitted to marry a female mamzer even though he was both conceived and born in holiness. This also applies to the son of his grandson [- or any other descendant -] until his connection with conversion is forgotten and it is not known that he [descends from] converts. Afterwards, he will be forbidden to marry a female mamzer. Converts and freed servants are bound by the same laws.
9. When a convert marries a native-born Jewess or a native-born Jew marries a convert, the son is a Jew in all contexts and is forbidden to marry a female mamzer.
10. There are three categories of mamzerim: one that is definitely a mamzer, a mamzer whose status is a matter of doubt, and a mamzer by Rabbinic decree. What is meant by one who is definitely a mamzer? The offspring of a relationship that is definitely incestuous or adulterous, as we explained. A mamzer whose status is a matter of doubt is the offspring of a relationship that we are unsure whether it is adulterous or incestuous. For example, a man engaged in relations with a woman who was consecrated, but we are unsure if the consecration was effective, or who was divorced, but we are unsure whether the divorce was effective, or a similar situation. A mamzer by Rabbinic decree: for example, a woman who heard that her husband died and remarried and then discovered that her husband was alive. Afterwards, her [first] husband engaged in relations with her while she was still married with her second husband, the offspring is a mamzer by Rabbinic decree.
11. When an unmarried woman becomes pregnant through a promiscuous relationship, we ask her: "What is [the status of] this fetus" or "...this child"? If she replies: "It is the child of a man of acceptable lineage; I entered into relations with an Israelite," her word is accepted and the son is acceptable. [This applies] even if most of the inhabitants of the city in which she engaged in relations are of unacceptable lineage.
12. If the child's mother was not questioned until she died, or she was a deaf-mute, mute, or intellectually or emotionally unstable, we consider the child as a mamzer whose status is questionable. [This ruling applies even] if she said: "I engaged in relations with so-and-so, the mamzer" or "...with so-and-so, the netin." Even if that person agrees with her statement, [the child's status is only doubtful. The rationale is:] Just as she engaged in relations with the person who admitted to her statement; so, too, she engaged in relations with others. 

Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20

All the priests in our day are assumed to be priests and they only partake in holy food that can be consumed within the borders [of eretz yisrael], meaning rabbinic Teruma however of Torah ordained Teruma and of Torah ordained Hallah only a priest with definite lineage may partake.
Who is a priest with definite lineage? Anyone about whom two witnesses testified that he is a priest and the son of john doe priest the son of john doe priest until we arrive at a man [whose priesthood] does not need to to be checked and he is a priest who served at the altar for had the Sanhedrin not checked after his status they would not have permitted him to serve.Similarly, in the present era, terumah is a Rabbinic commandment.11 Therefore it is eaten by the priests of our era [whose lineage is established merely] by presumption.Similarly, in the present era, terumah is a Rabbinic commandment.11 Therefore it is eaten by the priests of our era [whose lineage is established merely] by presumption.
...In the present era, even in Eretz Yisrael,8 challah does not have the status of a Scriptural commandment. [This is derived from Numbers 15:18:] "When you come into the land...."9 [Implied is when] all of you enter and not when only a portion enter.10 When Ezra ascended [to Eretz Yisrael], the entire people did not ascend.Similarly, in the present era, terumah is a Rabbinic commandment.11 Therefore it is eaten by the priests of our era [whose lineage is established merely] by presumption.
...When two witnesses testify that they saw a person partaking of terumah mandated by Scriptural Law, his lineage is established. We do not elevate a person [to the level that his priestly] lineage is [considered as] established based on the fact that he delivers the Priestly Blessing [to the people], reads the Torah first,12 or is given terumah in the granaries,or because of the testimony of one witness.
......

Chapter 21

Anyone who sleeps with one of the forbidden relationships "by way of limbs", or who hugs and kisses in a sexual way and takes pleasure in physical intimacy, receives lashes for a d'Oraisa transgression, as it says (Leviticus 18:30) "do not do any of these abominable customs etc" and it says (Leviticus 18:6) "do not approach to uncover nakedness", which is to say do not approach things which will bring you to transgressing Arayos.
One who engages in these behaviours is suspected of committing Arayos. And it's forbidden for a person to intimate with his hands or feet or to hint with his eyes to any of the Arayos or to laugh with her or to engage in light-headedness. And even to smell her perfume or to gaze at her beauty is forbidden. And one who engages in this deliberately receives lashes of rebelliousness. And one who gazes even at the little finger of a woman intending to derive sexual pleasure is comparable to one who looks at her genitalia. And even to hear the voice of an Ervah or to look at her hair is forbidden.
These matters are [also] forbidden with regard to women with whom relations are forbidden on the basis of [merely] a negative commandment. It is permitted to look at the face of an unmarried woman and examine her [features] whether she is a virgin or has engaged in relations previously to see whether she is attractive in his eyes so that he may marry her. There is no prohibition in doing this. On the contrary, it is proper to do this. One should not, however, look in a licentious manner. Behold [Job 31:1] states: "I established a covenant with my eyes; I would not gaze at a maiden."
A man is permitted to gaze at his wife when she is in the Niddah state although she is an Ervah [at that time]. Although his heart derives satisfaction from seeing her, since she will be permitted to him afterwards, he will not suffer a lapse. He should not, however, share mirth with her or act frivolously with her lest this lead to sin.
It is forbidden for a man to have any woman- whether a minor or an adult, whether a servant or a freed woman- perform personal tasks for him, lest he come to lewd thoughts. Which tasks are  referred to? Washing his face, his hands, or his feet, spreading his bed in his presence, and pouring him a cup. For these tasks are performed for a man only by his wife. [A man] should not send greetings to a woman at all, not even via a messenger. 
When a man embraces or kisses any of the women forbidden to him as arayot despite the fact that his heart does not disturb him concerning the matter, e.g. his adult sister, his mother's sister, or the like, it is very shameful. it is forbidden and it is foolish conduct. [This applies] even though he has no desire or pleasure at all. For one should not show closeness to a woman forbidden to him as an Ervah at all, whether an adult or a minor, except a woman to her son and a father to his daughter.
In what manner? a father may embrace and kiss his daughter and she may sleep alongside him with bodily contact, and so too a mother with her son, as long as they are minors. When they have grown up, so that the son has become [pubescent], and the daughter has become [pubescent] reaching the stage of “your breasts were fashioned, and your hair was grown” – this one sleeps in his garment and that one sleeps in her garment. If the daughter is ashamed to stand naked before her father, or she is betrothed, and likewise if the mother is ashamed to stand naked before her son – even if they are minors, when they reach the point of being embarrassed, they may not sleep alongside each other except clothed.
Women are forbidden to be mesolelot with one another. This is the practice of the Land of Egypt, against which we have been warned, as it is said: "Like the practice of the Land of Egypt etc. you shall not do." The Sages said: "What did they do? A man marries a man, a woman marries a woman, and a woman marries two men." Although this practice is forbidden, no flogging is imposed, since there is no specific negative commandment against it, nor is there any intercourse at all. Consequently, [such women] are not forbidden to the priesthood on account of harlotry, nor is a woman prohibited to her husband on account of it, since there is no harlotry in it. However, a flogging for disobedience (mardut) should be given, since they have performed a forbidden act. A man should be strict with his wife in this matter, and should prevent women who are known to engage in this practice from visiting her, and prevent her from going to them



Similarly, the sages forbade a man to have marital relations while thinking of another woman. Nor may he initiate sex while drunk, nor out of spite or hatred, nor may he rape her or initiate sex while she is afraid. Nor may they have sex while either of them are excommunicated nor after he has decided to divorce her. If [the husband] does any of those things, the children will not be proper [citizens] but brazen, rebellious [people] and criminals.




Jewish women should not walk in the market with their hair uncovered. [This applies to] single women and married women. Additionally, a woman should not walk in the market with her child following behind her. [This is] a decree (gezera) enacted to prevent the child being abducted, and her following after them to bring him back and being molested by the wicked people who capriciously abducted him





It is forbidden for a man who is not married to touch his private parts so that he doesn't come to sexual fantasy. And he may not even touch anywhere under his belly button lest he come to sexually fantasize. And when he urinates he should not hold his member and urinate. But if he is married this is permitted. And whether married or unmarried he shouldn't put his hand on his member at all except when he must relieve himself.

Chapter 22




















It is therefore fitting for a person to restrain his inclinations in this matter and to conduct himself with utmost holiness, pure thoughts and correct opinions to save himself from them. He should be cautious about seclusion because it is the main cause [of these sins]. The greatest among the Sages told their students, "watch me becuase it is my daugher" or "watch me because of my sister-in law" [whom one would assume one doesn't lust after] so that their students shouldn't be embarassed from this and would stay far away from seclusion.
Similarly, a person should accustom himself to stay far away from levity,drunkenness,and flirting because there are all major causes of the violation of prohibitions regarding forbidden sexual relationships. Also, one should not stay unmarried because this practice [of being married] is a cause of great purity. Greater than all these [our Sages] said that one should turn himself and his thoughts to words of Torah and immerse his mind in wisdom because sexual thoughts do not rule in one's mind except in the mind of one who's heart is turned away from wisdom. Regarding wisdom it is said, "It is a beloved hind, arousing favor. Her breasts will satisfy you at all times. You shall be obsessed with her love."