Mishneh Torah, Mourning
משנה תורה, הלכות אבל
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Mourning



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

According to rabbinic law, a mourner should observe some of the mourning customs throughout thirty days. From what biblical passage have the sages derived the number of thirty days? It is written: "She shall mourn her father and mother for a full month" (Deuteronomy 21:13). Hence, a mourner ought to grieve throughout thirty days.
Following are the things which a mourner must not do during the thirty days: he must not take a haircut, wear ironed clothes, get married, attend a social festivity, travel from one town to another on business—a total of five things.

Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12

Funeral rites are held in honor of the deceased. Accordingly, the heirs are compelled to pay a fee to wailing men and women who eulogize the dead. But if the deceased charged in his will not to eulogize him, he should not be eulogized. If, however, he charged in his will not to bury him, his wish is not heeded, because burying the dead is a religious duty, as it is written: "You must bury him" (Deuteronomy 21:23).
Anyone who is too indolent to mourn for a scholar will not enjoy longevity; anyone who is too indolent to mourn for a worthy man deserves to be buried alive. Anyone who sheds tears for a worthy person, there is a reward in store for him with God.

Chapter 13

How is consolation offered to the mourners? When the corpse has been buried, the mourners assemble and remain standing at the border of the cemetery. All who have escorted the deceased stand around them, row after row.— —
The mourners stand on the left of those who offer consolation, while all the comforters, one by one, approach the mourners and say to them: "May you be comforted by God." Then each mourner goes home. On each of the seven days of mourning, people come to offer him consolation.— —








One should not grieve too much over his deceased relative, as it is written : "Weep not for him who is dead, wail not over him" (Jeremiah 22:10); that is, weep not for him too much, since this is the way of the world. He who grieves too much over what is bound to happen is a fool. What measure of mourning should one follow? Three days for weeping, seven for lamenting, thirty days for abstaining from a haircut, and the rest of the five things.

Chapter 14

It is a rabbinic positive precept to visit the sick, comfort the mourners, escort the dead, dower the bride, accompany the [departing] guests — — as well as to cheer the bride and the groom, and to assist them in whatever they need. Even though all these precepts are of rabbinic origin, they are implied in the biblical verse: "You shall love your neighbor as yourself" (Leviticus 19:18); that is, whatever you would have others do to you, do to your brothers in Torah and precepts.
The reward for escorting a stranger is greater than any reward. It is a practice introduced by our father Abraham, a way of kindness which was habitual with him. He served food and drink to wayfarers and escorted them. Hospitality to wayfarers is greater than welcoming the Divine Presence, as it is written: "He saw three men … he ran to meet them" (Genesis 18:2). Escorting them is even greater than receiving them. The sages have declared: "Anyone who does not escort his guests is almost guilty of bloodshed" (Sotah 46b).
Local residents are compelled to provide escorts for wayfarers just as they are compelled to contribute to charity. The court used to provide agents to escort any person who would pass from one locality to another. Those who shirked this duty were regarded as if they shed blood [because of the dangerous roads]. Even if one accompanies another the distance of four cubits, he will be amply rewarded.— —
The duty of visiting the sick applies to everybody. Even an eminent person must visit one who is of minor importance. The visits should be made several times a day. The more often one visits the sick, the more praise he deserves, provided that he does not weary the patient. Whoever visits a patient is as though he took away part of his illness and lightened his pain. Whoever does not visit the sick is almost guilty of bloodshed.
A sick person should be visited only from the third day on. If his illness came on suddenly and his condition has become worse, he should be visited immediately. A patient should not be visited either during the first three hours or the last three hours of the day, because he is being attended to at the time.— —
















All the clothes that are thrown on the deceased and on the casket in which he is buried must not be used, lest they become mixed up with the shrouds [which of course must not be used for anything else].

One should be trained not to be destructive, not to suffer a loss of garments by casting them into a devastating [grave]. It is better to give them to the poor rather than casting them to worms and moths. Anyone who throws many garments upon the dead transgresses the prohibitive precept: "You shall not destroy" (Deuteronomy 20:19).