Mishneh Torah, Mourning
משנה תורה, הלכות אבל
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Mourning



Chapter 1

It is a positive commandment to mourn for one's closest relatives, as it is said (Lev 10:19) "...had I eaten sin offering today would the Lord have approved." And mourning is not based on Scripture except for the first day only because it is the day of the death and the day of the funeral. But the rest of the seven days are not torah-mandated, even though it says (Gen 50:10) "...and he mourned for his father seven days." - when the Torah was given the law was renewed. And Moses our teacher established the seven days of mourning and the seven days of celebrating for Israel.









When a person commits suicide [kills oneself with clarity of mind], we do not engage in activity on their behalf at all. We do not mourn for him or eulogize him. We do, however, stand in a line to comfort the relatives, recite the blessing for the mourners and perform any act that shows respect for the living. What is meant by a person who commits suicide? Not necessarily one who climbs up on a roof, falls, and dies, but rather, one who says: "I am going up to the top of the roof." If we see him climb up immediately in anger or know that he was distressed and see him fall and die, we presume such a person is one who committed suicide. If, however, we see him strangled and hanging from a tree or slain and lying on the back of his sword, we presume that he is like all other corpses. We engage in activity on his behalf and do not withhold anything from him.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3














It is permissible for a priest to become impure through walking through a beit hapras or the diaspora for the sake of a mitzvah, when there is no way other than that, e.g., he went to marry or to study Torah. Even though there is someone who could teach him in Eretz Yisrael, he is permitted to leave, because a person does not merit to learn from every colleague.Similarly, a person may incur ritual impurity that is Rabbinic in origin to show respect to other people. What is implied? If a mourner walked through a beit hapras, everyone follows after him to comfort him. Similarly, we may walk over the coffins of the dead to greet Jewish kings. This is allowed even to greet gentile kings, so that a distinction will be able to be made between them and Jewish kings when their glory will return to its place. Similarly, leniency is granted in all analogous situations. Also, a priest may incur ritual impurity of Rabbinic origin to enter in judgment and disputation with gentiles concerning property, for he is saving it from their hands. Similar laws apply in all analogous situations.

Chapter 4




…One should wait a little while, for perhaps [the person who appears to have died has simply swooned or fainted.…

Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12


The following rules apply when a person moves the coffin of a person from one place to another. If the corpse's backbone is intact, we stand in a line for him, recite the mourning blessing and the words of comfort for mourners. We eulogize him even if his bones were moved after twelve months after his death. If its backbone is not intact, we do not eulogize him. We do not stand in a line for him, nor do we recite the mourning blessing and the words of comfort for mourners.

Chapter 13



Chapter 14





















It is forbidden to benefit from a corpse with the exception of its hair. One may benefit from hair, because it is not his body. Similarly, it is forbidden to benefit from the coffin and the shrouds. There is no prohibition against benefiting from garments prepared to be used as shrouds. Even if one knitted a garment to be used for a corpse, they are not forbidden until they reach the bier which is buried with him. For designation of an article to be used for a corpse does not cause it to be forbidden.