Kuntres Mattan Torah
קונטרס מתן תורה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Kuntres_Mattan_Torah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Translated by Vital Transformation and Michal Ricardo, 2023
-https://vitaltransformation.org/

Kuntres Mattan Torah

First Introduction; Time to Act

I have long been plagued by daily pangs of conscience urging me to go beyond my own confines and write a comprehensive essay on the soul of Judaism and its religion and the knowledge of the origins of the wisdom of Kabbalah and to distribute it in public so people will gain from it proper knowledge and general understanding of these very important subjects, according to their true nature and character.
In past eras, in the Jewish world, before the printing press became available in the world, we had no fake books discussing the soul of Judaism and similar subjects, since there was almost no author irresponsible in his words in our midst. The reason is simple: an irresponsible person in most cases is not famous. Thus, if by any chance one dared to write such a composition, no copier would find copying the book profitable, because he would not be compensated for his work, which usually amounts to a considerable sum. Thus, the author would be destined to be forgotten.
At that time, even the knowledgeable had no interest in or were asked to author books of this kind, since this knowledge is unnecessary for the average person. On the contrary, it was in their interest to keep the matters hidden as “It is the glory of God to conceal a thing” (Proverbs 25:2) since we were commanded to hide the soul of the Torah and service from those who do not need it or do not merit it, so it would not be belittled or displayed for the interest of those who look at it through a peephole or the boastful, for we are beholden to the glory of God.
But now that the art of printing is widespread, authors no longer need copiers, and the high price of books has plummeted. This, however, paved the way for irresponsible authors to author books as they please, for gain or for glory and the like. They do not examine their own actions; nor do they consider their handiwork.
Books of that kind started to proliferate since that time, involving no study of Kabbalah or oral transmission from a qualified Rabbi. Even without knowledge of all those ancient books that pertain to the subject, their authors produce conjectures from their own flesh and blood, containing idle falsehoods. They attribute the words to the loftiest ideas to thus mold the nation’s soul and its immense treasure. Like fools, they know not how to beware; nor do they have a way to know that they introduce erroneous opinions to generations. In exchange for their miniscule desires, they sin and cause many to sin for generations to come.
Lately, their stench rose high, because they have sunk their claws into the wisdom of Kabbalah, without realizing that this wisdom has been kept under lock and key to this day. None can either leave or enter it, understand the proper meaning of a single word, or, needless to say, the connection between words. For all the true books that were written so far contain but subtle hints that are barely sufficient only for students who understand by themselves when they receive their interpretation from a wise Kabbalist who is authorized to impart it. Even “There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and brood under her shadow” (Isaiah 34:15). These days, there are many conjurers who make concoctions that the beholders find loathsome.
Some of them will even rise to the mountaintop, seizing a place appropriate only to the leaders of the generation. They pretend to be knowledgeable enough to pick among the books of ancient and early authors and instruct the public as to which book is worthy of being perused and which book is not worthy of being considered because it is full of delusional ideas, God forbid, and “Thus shall there be contempt and wrath in plenty” (Esther 1:18). Until now, the work of choosing was attributed and accessible only to one in ten generational leaders; yet now ignoramuses abuse it.
Therefore, the public loses its mind when it comes to grasping such matters. Furthermore, this created an atmosphere of lightness, and each person thinks that a single overview at a time of leisure is sufficient to observe and visit such lofty matters. They skim through the entire lofty world of wisdom and the origins of the soul of Judaism in a single swoop, like the well-known angel.
And they come to conclusions, each according to his mood. These are the reasons I became very angry and decided that “It is time to act for the Lord” (Psalms 119:126) and save what can still be saved. I took it upon myself to reveal to a certain degree the origin that pertains to this knowledge and publish it among people.

Second Introduction; Uncovering a Handbreadth While Covering Two

It is customary for great renowned people, when they reveal a deep subject, to begin with “I am uncovering a handbreadth and covering two.” Our ancient sages were very careful not to utter unnecessary words, as we were instructed by the sages that “If a word is worth a sela<sup>1</sup><i class="footnote">An ancient monetary unit</i>, silence is worth two” (tractate Megillah 18a; the Introduction of the Zohar with the Sulam commentary, section 18). Interpretation: if you have a precious word at the tip of your tongue, which is worth a sela, know that remaining silent about it is worth two. This is directed at those who utter extraneous, meaningless words, which are useful for the sake of discussion only to improve the language and amuse the readers. Our ancient sages considered this strictly forbidden, as those who studied their words know, and as I shall prove in the following essays. We therefore need to concentrate on understanding their flowery phrases, which they were in the habit of reciting so often.
<big><strong>Three categories of the concealment of wisdom</strong></big>
The mysteries of the Torah contain three categories, each with a specific reason to be withheld. They are called: 1. The frivolous, 2. The impossible, and 3. “The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him” (Psalms 25:14). There is not even the tiniest detail of this wisdom that cannot be explained by the three said categories. I shall discuss them one by one.
1. <b>The frivolous</b><br>It means that no one will gain any benefit from revealing these matters. Of course, this is not very detrimental but is merely a matter of clarity, of being wary of actions that are considered unimportant, as if to say, it is of no consequence since this is not harmful. Know that the frivolous is considered by sages the most corrupting since all individuals who erode the world, both those who were created in the past and those who will be created, are merely unimportant individuals, meaning that they are engaged in and engage others in frivolous matters. The sages therefore did not accept any disciple before they were sure that he would be careful in his dealings by not revealing that which is unnecessary.
2. <b>The impossible</b><br>This means that language cannot describe the quality of the mysteries, due to their great subtlety and spiritual nature. Therefore, any attempt to clothe them with words can merely mislead the readers and turn them onto a false path. This is considered an unbearable sin. In order to reveal something of matters such as these, heavenly permission is required. This is the second part of the concealment of wisdom. Heavenly permission, however, requires explanation.
<b>Heavenly permission</b><br>This subject is explained in the book the Gate of the Sayings of Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai by Arizal on the Zohar, portion Mishpatim [section 122], beginning with the words: “The son of Yoḥai knew how to be careful.” It says thus:
“Know that some righteous people’s souls have the aspect of surrounding light and some are of the aspect of inner light (you will find their interpretation in my book Welcoming Face, Gate of Surrounding Lights, branch forty-eight). All those who originate in the side of surrounding light are able to discuss the mysteries and secrets of the Torah in great concealment and in secrecy, so they would be understood only by one who merits to understand them. The soul of Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai was from the aspect of surrounding light, so he was capable of clothing the words and expounding them in such a way that even if he lectured before an audience, only the meritorious would understand them. He was therefore given ‘permission’ to author the Book of the Zohar. No such ‘permission’ to author a book of this wisdom was given to his teacher or to his predecessors since even though they were more knowledgeable in this wisdom than he, they were incapable of clothing the words as he was. This is why it is written that the son of Yoḥai knew how to beware in his ways… You will thus understand the magnitude of the concealment in the Book of the Zohar, which Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai wrote; not every mind can understand his words.”
The gist of his words is that the subject of the explanations of the wisdom of truth does not depend on the high or low level of the Kabbalist; instead, it is an issue of the illumination of the soul that is specific to this matter. This illumination of the soul is tantamount to giving “permission” from heaven to disclose celestial wisdom. We have learned that whoever did not receive such permission must not expound this wisdom since he cannot clothe those subtleties with adequate words in such a way that the readers would not misunderstand. For that reason, we have not encountered a methodical book regarding the wisdom of truth before the Book of the Zohar by Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai; the books about this wisdom that preceded it are not considered interpretations but mere allusions without proper order, as the seekers of wisdom are well aware. This concludes the discussion of his words.
It needs to be added from what I learned from authors and from books that since the time of Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai and his disciples until the time of Arizal, no author was able to interpret the words of the Zohar and the Tikunnim as Arizal did. All preceding compilations were merely alluding to this wisdom, including the books of the sage Rabbi Moshe Kordovero.
The same words that were spoken of Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai must also refer to Arizal himself. His predecessors were not given permission from heaven to make known the explanations of this wisdom available. Arizal, however, was given permission. According to it, this is not a distinction between the great and the lowly; the level of his predecessors could have been infinitely above that of Arizal, but they were not given permission to do it. They were therefore held back from writing interpretations that pertained to the wisdom itself but were content with giving short, unconnected hints.
For this reason, once the books of Arizal were published, all those who engaged in the wisdom of Kabbalah withdrew from all the books of Rabbi Moshe Kordovero and the ancient sages, the Geonim and the Rishonim, who preceded Arizal, as is well known among the students of this wisdom. Instead, they adhered in their spiritual life only to the writing of Arizal, so that the principal books that were considered proper expositions of this wisdom are only the Books of the Zohar and the Tikunnim, followed by the books of Arizal.
3. <big><strong>“The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him.”</strong></big>
It means that the secrets of the Torah are expounded only to those who fear his name, who protect God’s glory with their whole soul and might so they would never commit any desecration. This is the third part of the concealment of wisdom.
This part is the most serious regarding concealment because revelations of this kind caused many casualties by producing many adjurers of angels, cameo writers, students of practical Kabbalah who deceive people with their cunning, and all mystics who use inferior kind of wisdom produced by inferior scholars, to receive material benefit for themselves or others. The world has suffered much from them, and still does.
Know that the essence and root of concealment was at first due to this part alone. The sages adopted additional stringent rules when vetting disciples to the point that the sages have said, “One may transmit the outlines only to the president of the court, and to anyone whose heart inside him is concerned (about his sins)” (tractate Ḥagigah 13a) and “One may not expound… the act of Creation before two; nor by oneself the Design of the Divine Chariot” (Ibid. 11b). You will find many such instances, and the concern has been explained above. For this reason, the elect who attained this wisdom are few, and even those who fulfilled the requirements after seven checks and investigations are sworn under strict and fearsome oaths not to reveal anything of those three parts. (v. the Introduction of Rabbi Moshe Butril to Sefer Yetzira).
Do not mistake what I said about dividing the concealment of wisdom into three categories to mean that the wisdom of truth itself is divided into three such categories. What I mean by each and every category in the breadth of this wisdom is that there is not the smallest word throughout the breadth of this wisdom without those three parts branching out from it. They are merely ways of interpretation that always apply to this wisdom; understand this!
Yet we need to ask here, if this is true that the concealment of wisdom reached such a degree, where did the thousands of compositions that were written about this wisdom come from?
The answer is that there is a difference between the two first categories and the last one. The main burden is on the third one alone for the aforesaid reason. But the first two categories are not permanently restricted. The frivolous category sometimes becomes something else; it is no longer frivolous for some reason and becomes essential. Moreover, the impossible sometimes becomes possible for two reasons: either with the evolution of people or by being given heavenly permission, as happened to Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai and Arizal, and to their predecessors to a smaller extent. All the true books written about this wisdom derive from these circumstances.
This is what is meant by the proverb “revealing some and concealing much.<sup>1</sup><i class="footnote">Lit.: Reveal a handbreadth, conceal two handbreadths.</i>” It means that they wanted to reveal something new not considered by previous scholars. It alludes therefore to one handbreadth, that is, one of the three categories of concealment discussed above, while keeping two categories hidden. This is an indication that something transpired, which is the reason to reveal that matter. The frivolous can become necessary, or permission to reveal is given from heaven, as I explained above. This is what is meant by the expression “I revealed a handbreadth.”
Let the readers who peruse these booklets that I plan to print in the course of the year know that they are all new. They were not introduced in full and in their truly exact content in any book that preceded mine. I received them through oral transmission from my teacher who is qualified, meaning that he too received it through oral transmission from his teachers, and so on. I received them under the conditions of concealment and protection, as said. Yet out of necessity, as I wrote in my article “A time to act” above, that which was frivolous has become necessary. I therefore revealed some with full permission, as I explained above. As for “concealing much,” I will guard them as I was commanded.

First Discourse; The Giving of the Torah

<big><strong>Questions and explanations</strong></big>
“…but you shall love your neighbor as yourself” (Leviticus 19:18). “Rabbi Akiva said: ‘Love your neighbor as yourself’ is the central tenet (<i>kelal</i>) of the Torah” (Bereshit Rabbah 24:7)
1. This saying of our sages begs for an explanation. The word <i>kelal</i> also means the sum of all the details, which, when joined together, create a whole (<i>kelal</i>). It transpires that when he said that the commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself” is the central tenet of the Torah, we should understand that the other six hundred twelve commandments in the Torah, with all its verses, are neither more nor less than the sum of all the details that lie in and are conditional on this one commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself.” These words are enigmatic. This is true when it relates to interpersonal commandments; but how can that one commandment contain and support within it all the commandments between a person and God, which are the foundations of the Torah, its supports, and its structure?
2. Furthermore, if we can work and find some way to settle what they said here, let us consider a second, even more striking saying by the gentile man who came before Hillel and asked him to “teach me the entire Torah while I am standing on one foot… He… said to him: That which is hateful to you do not do to another” (tractate Shabbat 31a), (which is the Aramaic translation of “…but you shall love your neighbor as yourself”) “and the rest is its interpretation. Go study” (Ibid.). We have before us a clear ruling that none of the six hundred twelve commandments or any of the verses of the Torah is better than the single commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself” since their only purpose is to interpret and allow us to properly observe the commandment to love one another, as it clearly states, “and the rest is its interpretation. Go study,” which means that the rest of the Torah is an interpretation of this single commandment so that it is impossible to fulfill the commandment “love your neighbor as yourself” without them.
<b>The definition of the commandment to love one another</b><br>3. Before we plunge into the depth of the subject, we need to examine this commandment by itself. We were commanded to “love your neighbor as yourself.” The phrase “as yourself” tells us that you should love your neighbor to the same degree that you love yourself, not less on any account. This means that I am beholden to always be vigilant and fulfill the needs of each and every person in the entire Jewish people, not less than I am always vigilant to fulfill my own needs. This is utterly impossible since only a few could, throughout their workday, fulfill even their own needs. How can you task someone with working and fulfilling the wishes of an entire nation? Yet it is impossible to think that the Torah speaks in hyperboles, for the Torah warns us “You shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it” (Deuteronomy 13:1), to show you that words and laws were spoken with the utmost precision.
4. As if you find this insufficient, let me tell you that the literal meaning of this commandment to love one’s neighbor is even more exacting. Our neighbor’s needs should take precedence over our own. This follows the Tosafot interpretation of the Jerusalem Talmud regarding the verse, “because he is happy with you” (Deuteronomy 15:16), referring to a Hebrew slave, in the following words:
“At times, when he has but a single mattress, if he lies on it himself and does not give it to the slave, he does not uphold ‘because he is happy with you’” (Tosafot on Kiddushin 20a), for he lies on a mattress while the slave lies on the ground. “But if he does not lie on it, yet does not give it to the slave, this is the Sodomite rule (selfishness). He thus necessarily has to hand it to his slave” (Ibid.), while the master should lie on the ground. Study there well.
We learn from this that we must apply the same reasoning to our verse teaching love for one another. Here too, the verse compared fulfilling a neighbor’s needs to fulfilling one’s own needs, as in the case of “because he is happy with you” that discusses the Hebrew slave. Thus, even here, if a person has a single chair and another has no chair at all, the Halachic law is that if he sits on it and does not give it to the other person, he transgresses the positive commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself” by not fulfilling his neighbor’s needs as he would his own. And neither sitting on it nor giving it to another to sit on is selfishness. One is beholden to give it to another to sit on while he himself will either sit on the ground or remain standing. By law, of course, this applies to all possessions that he has but the other does not. Now, go and learn whether it is possible to fulfill this commandment.
<b>The chosen people</b><br>5. We first need to understand why the Torah was given specifically to the Jewish nation, instead of being given equally to all peoples. Is there a whiff of nationalism here, Heaven forbid? Surely, only someone who lost his mind would think so. In truth, the sages have already addressed this question; this is their intention in their words, “the Holy One, blessed be He, took [the Torah] around to every nation and [those who speak every] language, but they did not accept it” (tractate Avoda Zara 2b), as is well known. But, according to their words, the difficulty lies in the reasoning we were called the chosen nation, as said, “the Lord your God has chosen you…” (Deuteronomy 7:6, Ibid. 14:2), considering that none of the other nations wanted it. Furthermore, the words are difficult in principle. Could the Holy One, blessed be He, have gone with Torah in hand and negotiated with illiterate savages – or did so through his prophets? This is unheard of and unacceptable.
<big><strong>The essence of the Torah and the commandments</strong></big>
<b>The purpose of the creation of the world</b><br>6. But when we fully understand the essence of the Torah and the commandments that were given us and their desirable outcome to the degree that the sages have instructed us, which is the purpose of the entire great Creation that is laid before our eyes, we shall understand everything. According to principle, no one acts purposelessly. There is no exception save for people of the lowest quality and children. In that case, there can be no doubt that the Creator, whose loftiness is beyond grasping, would do something small or large without an aim, Heaven forbid. The sages have instructed us that the world has been created only for the sake of observing the Torah and the commandments.
According to the earlier sages, it means that the Creator’s intention regarding Creation from its inception is to declare his divinity to others. The declaration of his divinity reaches the created being as the measure of his pleasant abundance that increases until it reaches the desired amount. This is how the humble rise with the true recognition of their being a chariot for the Creator and by cleaving to him until they achieve their ultimate perfection: “neither has the eye seen… god, beside you” (Isaiah 64:3). Due to the magnitude and the majesty of that perfection, both the Torah and the prophets were careful not to utter a single word of this superlative state. The sages alluded to it when they said: “All the prophets only prophesied with regard to the days of the Messiah. However, with regard to the world to come, ‘neither has the eye seen… god, beside you’” (tractate Berakhot 34b). This is known to the knowledgeable, and this is not the place to discuss this at length.
This perfection is expressed in the words of the Torah, the prophets and of the sages using the simple term cleaving. As the word morphed, with the evolution of the spoken language, it nearly lost all its meaning. But if you briefly dwell on this term, you will stand wondering at its amazing loftiness by imagining this divine matter and the graceful value of the lowly created being. You could then deduce the one cleaving to the other. You will then understand why we use this word to describe the purpose of this great Creation.
We deduce with our words that the ultimate purpose of Creation is that the lowly created beings would be able, by observing the Torah and the commandments, to gradually rise up and evolve until they will merit to cleave to their blessed Creator.
<b>The damage of shame and its betterment</b><br>7. But here the sages of the Zohar rose and asked, why has he not created us at the onset with the desired loftiness necessary to cleave to the blessed Creator? Why had he transferred to us the burden and this toil of Creation with the Torah and the commandments? And they answered, “one who has eaten that which is not his is ashamed to look at his [the benefactor’s] face” (Da’at Tevunot by Rabbi Moshe Haim Lutzato, chapter 18) … Meaning, whoever eats of and enjoys the work of another is ashamed to look at him, because he is humiliated to the point of losing his human form. Yet since he derives from the perfection of blessed lofty God, he could not lack for anything. He therefore gave us room to acquire by ourselves our desired loftiness by means of our own handiwork in the Torah and the commandments. Their words are very deep, and I have already explained them methodically in my book Welcoming Face, [a commentary] on the Tree of Life, first branch, and in the book the Study of the Ten Sefirot, Inner Observation, part 1. I shall explain them briefly here, so they will be accessible to everyone.
8. This is comparable to a wealthy man who summoned someone from the marketplace. He fed him, gave him drink, and gave him silver and gold and precious objects day after day. And each day’s gifts were more numerous than the previous one’s gifts. This kept on until the wealthy man eventually asked him, “Tell me, are all your wishes already fulfilled?” And the man answered, “None of my wishes are fulfilled; how good, how pleasant would it be if I have acquired all this property and precious objects by my own work as you did, instead of being given gifts by your kindness. The wealthy man said to him, “In that case, the man who could fulfill your wishes has not yet been born.”
It is natural that on the one hand he experiences intense pleasure that increases as the gifts accumulate, yet on the other hand it is hard to suffer shame for so much good that the wealthy man increasingly bestowed on him. It is a natural law that the recipient feels a sense of shame and impatience when he receives free gifts from the giver who feels charitable toward him and pities him. From here we arrive at the second law that there can never be imagined one who could fully fulfill another person’s wishes, since this cannot acquire the form of self-acquisition that alone allows the complete sense of abundance. 
This refers only to created beings, while it is impossible and inappropriate to attribute it to the lofty wholeness of the Creator. He therefore created for us labor and effort to arrive at our loftiness ourselves by engaging in the Torah and the commandments; then all the pleasure and goodness that reach us from the blessed One, that is, all that is included when cleaving to the Creator, will be considered self-obtained, acquired by our own actions since we feel ownership over the matter. Without it we do not have a sense of completion, as explained.
<b>The principle of the branch and the root</b><br>9. We should observe the principle of this natural law and its origin, understand out of whose womb came the blemish of shame and impatience that we now feel when we receive kindness from anyone. It is a principle known to botanists that every branch closely resembles and equals its root in its nature. The branch will be satisfied with everything that relates to the root, like it, seek it and benefit from it. On the other hand, the branch also avoids everything that does not relate to the root, because it cannot tolerate it and might even be damaged by it. This principle exists between every root and its branch and is immutable.
<b>Pleasure and suffering in our world</b><br>This gives us an opening to understand the source of all the pleasures and suffering that are set in our world. As blessed God is the source of all the beings he created, we will take pleasure in and enjoy all the matters that are included in him and flow from him directly to us; for our nature is close to our blessed source. But all matters that do not relate to the Creator, and which did not directly flow to us from him but through the direct opposite of Creation itself, will be against our own nature and we will find it hard to tolerate them.
That is, we love rest and dislike movement so much, that we make no movement except for attaining rest. The reason is that our root is not full of movement but is restful, and there is no movement in the blessed One, Heaven forbid. It will likewise be against our own nature and disliked. In the same way, we love intelligence, power, and wealth very much since all these are included in blessed God, who is our root; we therefore hate their opposite very much, such as stupidity, weakness, and poverty for they are not present in our root at all; this causes us to feel disgust and hatred and also causes intolerable suffering.
10. This is what gives us this damaging sense of shame and impatience when we receive something from others as kindness; there is nothing related to receiving favors in the nature of blessed God, for whom will he receive from? And since this is not the case with our blessed source, we find it disgusting and hateful, as said. On the other hand, we feel pleasure and enjoyment when we give something to another, since this is part of our source, which gives to anyone.
<b>Similarity of form</b><br>11. We have found a window through which to behold the Creation’s purpose “that you may cleave to him” (Deuteronomy 11:22, Ibid. 30:20, Joshua 22:5), to his true countenance. The whole subject of loftiness and cleaving that is assured to us by our actions in the Torah and the commandments is neither more nor less than the matter of the branches becoming like to their root. This way, every pleasure and enjoyment, and everything lofty, flows naturally on its own, as explained above that the matter of pleasure is merely the similarity between the form and its maker. And since we are identical in every way to every characteristic present in our source, we are in a state of bliss and whatever occurs to us, which is not present in our source, becomes intolerable and disgusting or actually hurts, as obligated by that notion. It transpires of itself that our entire hope derives from the similarity of our form to our blessed source.
<b>The purpose of the commandments</b><br>12. When the sages raised the issue, they said: “After all, why should the Holy One, blessed be He, care whether one slaughters an animal from the throat or he slaughters it from the nape? Thus, we learn that the commandments were given only to refine the creations with them” (Bereshit Rabbah 44:1). This refinement refers to the purification of the dense body. The aim of observing the entire Torah and all the commandments is that “a wild ass’s colt shall be turned into a man” (Job 11:12). When he emerges from, born to the lap of Creation, he is in a state of utmost filth and lowliness, which refers to the matter of the substantial amount of self-love that is inherent in him so that all his movements strongly revolve around himself without a glimmer of giving anything to another. He is thus at the furthest distance from the blessed root, that is, diametrically opposed to it. For the root is complete giving, without any glimmer of receiving at all, Heaven forbid. And that which is born is in a state of receiving for oneself without any glimmer of giving at all. His state is therefore considered at the nadir of lowliness and filth in our human world. As one grows, he receives from his environment partial lessons of “giving to another.” This surely depends on the value of the evolution of that environment.
When they start to educate him to observe the Torah and the commandments for the sake of self-love, it is for the sake of reward in this world and the next, called “doing it not for its own sake.” For he cannot be accustomed to it any other way. As he grows older, he is taught how to engage in the commandments for their own sake, which is focusing one’s intent solely on giving satisfaction to one’s maker, as Maimonides said that women and children should not be taught to engage in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake because they could not manage it. As they grow and acquire wisdom and understanding, they are taught to engage in it for its own sake (v. Maimonides, Laws of Repentance, 10). As our sages have said, “through [engaging in the Torah and the commandments] not for their own sake, one will ultimately come [to engage in them] for their own sake” (tractate Sanhedrin 105b and others). This is defined by the intention to give satisfaction to his maker rather than for self-love under all circumstances.
This is enabled by the natural quality of engaging in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake, which the giver of the Torah knows, as the sages have said, “The Holy One, blessed be He, said… I created the evil inclination, and I created the Torah as its antidote” (tractate Kiddushin 30b). Thus, the created being keeps evolving and ascends the stairs and rungs of that loftiness, until he loses all sparks of self-love from within him; all the commandments in his body are elevated and his every movement is only for the sake of giving in such a way that even when he of necessity receives something, this also flows toward the intent to give, that is, so he would be able to give. This is the meaning of the words of the sages, “the commandments were given only to refine the creations with them.”
<big><strong>The whole of the Torah – love for one another</strong></big>
<b>The two parts of the Torah have one purpose</b><br>13. The Torah contains two parts. The first is the commandments between a person and God, the second is the commandments between one person and another. Both, however, are directed toward the single aim of bringing the created being to the final goal of cleaving to blessed God, as explained.
Moreover, even the practical side in both is also on the same level; for when a person acts “for its own sake” and does not mingle any self-love with it, that is, by deriving any self-benefit, when he acts, he will feel no difference whether it is for the love of another or for the love of God.
It is a natural law that any person reaching beyond the frame of his own body sees it as empty and completely unreal; and any movement a person makes for the love of another, he does so with the help of returning light and a reward that will eventually come back to him and benefit him. Such an action cannot therefore be considered as if it were performed for the love of others, because it is decided by its end result. It is comparable to a salary that is paid only upon completion, and in any case receiving a salary is not considered the love of another. But doing any type of action and effort for the love of another, that is, without any sparks of returning light or hope for a reward coming back to him, is impossible by nature. The Zohar spoke of such issues regarding the nations: “Every kindness that they do, they do it for their own sake,” meaning that when they are kind to their neighbors or as they worship their God, it is not for the love of another but for self-love. This is because such a thing is beyond the confines of nature, as explained.
Therefore, only people who observe the Torah and the commandments are capable of it by accustoming themselves to observe the Torah and the commandments to give satisfaction to one’s maker. Then, the person slowly separates and leaves the bosom of natural creation and acquires a second nature, which is the said love for others. This brought the sages of the Zohar to completely exclude the nations from the matter of love for one another, saying that “Every kindness that they do, they do it for their own sake,” since they do not engage in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake. The purpose of worshipping their gods is a reward and protection in this world and the world to come, as we know. Thus, even their god worship is for the sake of self-love. In any case, no action will ever take place outside the framework of their own body, through which they could be elevated even a hairbreadth above the level of nature.
14. We see with our own eyes that one who is engaged in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake, even with regard to the practical side of the Torah, sees no difference between the two parts of the Torah. Before he is proficient in it, he of necessity feels within himself any action towards another, both to God and other people, as empty and meaningless. But through significant effort, this slowly rises and evolves into a second nature, as said. He then immediately attains the final aim, which is cleaving to blessed God.
It is a reasonable conjecture that the part of the Torah that relates to interpersonal relationships is better capable of bringing a person to the desired goal, since service through observing the commandments between a person and God is set and fixed and none demands anything. But the commandments between one person and another are not set and not fixed; people make demands of him wherever he turns. They are better qualified for it and their aim is closer to being attained.
<b>“Love your neighbor as yourself.”</b><br>15. We can now clearly understand the words of Hillel the Nassi to the gentile man that the main axis of the Torah is “love your neighbor as yourself” and that the other six hundred twelve commandments are an interpretation of and a preparation for it (as said in section 2). Even the commandments between a person and God are considered a preparation for this commandment, which is the final goal of the entire Torah and the commandments, as our sages have said, “the commandments were given only to refine Israel with them” (as said in section 12), referring to the purification of the body, until one acquires the second nature defined as the love for one another, that is, the single commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself,” which is the final aim of the Torah. This is immediately followed by meriting to cleave to the Creator.
Do not ask why this is not articulated by the verse, “And you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might” (Deuteronomy 6:5). The reason is that for a person still within the nature of Creation [obeying natural laws], there is no difference between love for God and love for others because everything that is outside him is considered unrealistic. The gentile man asked Hillel to explain to him what the entirety is of what is desired from the Torah so that he would reach his goal sooner and will not need to travel far, as he said, “teach me the entire Torah while I am standing on one foot” (tractate Shabbat 31a). And he defined it to him as the love for one another since its aim is nearer and quicker to achieve (as said in section 14) since it is safe from mistakes and since there are those to make demands.
<b>The observance of the love for one another is the preparation for the receiving of the Torah</b><br>16. Through these words we have found an opening to understand what we stated above (in sections 3-4) about the main content of this commandment, “…but you shall love your neighbor as yourself,” how the Torah can obligate us to observe something that is impossible to observe. Study there well. Understand though that for this reason the Torah was not given to the patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Instead, this was delayed until the exodus from Egypt, when they left and became a whole nation of six hundred thousand men, twenty years and older. Each one of the nation was asked whether he agrees to this lofty work; after each one in the nation agreed with his whole heart and soul and said, “…will we do and obey” (Exodus 24:7), it became possible to observe this matter, which is the whole of the Torah. It left the category of the impossible and became possible.
This is absolutely possible, if six hundred thousand people stop engaging in their own needs and have no other concern in their lives but to be on guard always that none of their neighbors lack for anything. Furthermore, they should engage in it with immense love in their whole heart and soul to the full extent of the commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself.” It is then clear beyond doubt that there is no more need for any individual of the nation’s members to worry at all for his own sustenance. One then becomes completely free of caring about supporting himself and can easily observe the commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself” under all the conditions discussed in sections 3 and 4. For how can he fear for his own sustenance even for a moment when six hundred thousand loving and trustworthy men are ready and meticulously prepared to ensure that he would lack for nothing?
Therefore, after each of the members of the nation agreed to it, the Torah was forthright given to them for now they were ready to observe it. But before they multiplied into a complete nation, not to mention during the time of the patriarchs who were merely individuals in the land of Israel, they were not prepared to observe the Torah properly, since with a small number of people we cannot even begin to engage in the interpersonal commandments according to the axis of “love your neighbor as yourself” as discussed in sections 3 and 4. The Torah was therefore not given to them.

Second Discourse; Arvut

<big><strong>Mutual guarantee in Israel</strong></big>
“The entire Jewish people are guarantors for one another” (tractates Sanhedrin 27b. Shevuot 39a).
17. This allows us to understand one of the most enigmatic sayings of the sages, that is, “the entire Jewish people are guarantors for one another” (tractate Shevuot 39a). This is completely unfair. How can it be that if one sins or transgresses and provokes his maker, and if I do not know him or am related to him, the Holy One, blessed be He, will still demand his payment from me. It is written that “Fathers shall not be put to death for children… every man shall be put to death for his own sin” (Deuteronomy 24:16, II Chronicles 25:4). How can they say that I am responsible for the sins even of a complete stranger, whom I do not know, nor his place?
If this is not provoking enough, see the words: “Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon says: Since the world is judged by its majority [depending on whether people have performed a majority of commandments or sins], and an individual is judged by his majority, if he performs one commandment, he is praiseworthy, as he tilts [the balance of] himself and the entire world to the scale of merit. If he transgresses one prohibition, woe to him, as he tilts [the balance of] himself and the entire world to the scale of liability, as is stated, ‘but one sinner…’” (tractate Kiddushin 40b) “destroys much good” (Ecclesiastes 9:18). So, Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, made me a guarantor for the entire world as well! According to his opinion, all the people in the world are guarantors for one another. Each person will bring merit or liability to the entire world. This is doubly confusing.
<b>Accepting mutual responsibility</b><br>But according to their explanations above, the words of the sages are simply understood and agreed on. We have clearly proved that each detail among the six hundred thirteen commandments in the Torah revolves around the axis of the single commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself.” It has been explained that this axis can only exist in a complete nation with all of its members ready for it.
According to the notion of mutual guarantee, all the members of the Jewish people have become guarantors for one another. The Torah was not given before each person in Israel was asked whether he agrees to accept the commandment to love one another to the full extent of the verse, “…but you shall love your neighbor as yourself” (Leviticus 19:18) (as explained in sections 2-3; read every word carefully). It means that every person in the Jewish nation should accept it upon himself to care and work for each of the nation’s members, fulfilling all his needs no less than it is natural to care for personal needs.
After the entire nation has unanimously agreed and said, “…will we do and obey” (Exodus 24:7), each one in the nation of Israel became a guarantor, ensuring that none of the members of the nation will want for anything; then, and only then, will they be able to receive the Torah. For through this mutual guarantee, each single member is free from the need to care for personal bodily needs and can observe the commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself” to its full extent and give all that he has to the needy since he is no longer concerned for the sustenance of his own body, knowing and assured that six hundred thousand people who truly love him surround him, ready to care for him (as explained in section 16, see there). For that reason, they were completely unready to receive the Torah during the time of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob but only when they left Egypt and became a complete nation on their own, creating the reality in which each one can be assured of all his needs without any worry or care.
This is unlike when they had still been among the Egyptians, and of necessity some of their needs had been handed to those savage foreigners who were filled with self-love, so it transpires that the measure handed to the foreigners would not be assured to Jewish individuals, since their companions would not be able to fill those needs because it is not in their hands. It has been explained that as long as an individual is troubled by any personal worries, he is incapable of even beginning to observe the commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself.”
<b>The nation’s dependence on individuals</b><br>It is clear that the matter of giving the Torah had to be postponed until they left Egypt and became their own nation, that is, when all their needs would be in their own hands, independent of others. They were then capable of accepting the said mutual guarantee and the Torah was given to them. Thus, even after the giving of the Torah, if a few Jews betray it and return to the filth of self-love without any consideration for others, that measure of need entrusted to those few cause each Jewish individual to take care of himself, for those few will have no pity for him at all. This way, the observance of the commandment to love one another is withheld from the entire people of Israel, as said. Thus, those who cast off the yoke [of Heaven] cause those who observe the Torah to remain in their filth of self-love, unable to engage now in the commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself” and be perfected in the love for others without their help, as said.
Thus, as you see before you, “the entire Jewish people are guarantors for one another” both in active terms and negative terms. In positive terms, that is, when they fulfill their responsibility so each cares for and fulfills the wants of others, they are able to wholly observe the Torah and the commandments and give satisfaction to their maker (as said in section 13). It is also true in terms of negation, that is, if a part of the nation refuses to engage in mutual responsibility since they are mired in self-love, they cause the rest of the nations to remain mired in filth and lowliness unable to escape their filthy stance, as explained.
18. The Tanna explained the notion of guarantee by bringing a pertinent story of two people who were sailing in a ship. “One started to drill underneath him and make a hole in the ship. His fellow passenger said to him, why are you drilling? He said to him, ‘What do you care. It is under my seat that I am drilling, not under yours.’ He replied, ‘Fool, the two of us will be lost together with the ship’” (v. Vayikra Rabbah 4:6). This affirms our words that those who cast the yoke [of heaven] are mired in self-love. They create with their actions an iron fence that blocks the keepers of the Torah from even beginning to properly observe the Torah and the commandments, that is, to the extent of the verse, “love your neighbor as yourself,” which is the ladder through which to reach cleaving to blessed God. How correct are the words of the parable, in which he told him, “Fool, the two of us will be lost together with the ship.”
<big><strong>Mutual Guarantee throughout the world</strong></big>
<b>Beginning with a single nation</b><br>19. Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, speaks even more highly of mutual guarantee. Not only are the Jewish people guarantors for each other, the entire world is part of mutual guarantee. No one disagrees; everyone agrees that at first it suffices for a single nation to observe the Torah, that is, merely to begin to improve the world since it is impossible to begin with all nations at once. According to the words of the sages (see the article The Giving of the Torah, section 5), the Holy One, blessed be He, went around with the Torah to every nation and the speakers of every tongue but they did not wish to receive it; that is, they were mired in the filth of self-love up to their noses, some in fornication, some in robbery and murder, and the like, so that it was unimaginable in those days to speak with them about consenting to withdraw from self-love.
The Holy One, blessed be He, therefore found no other nation or a people who spoke any tongue that would be able of receiving the Torah save the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Their ancestors’ merit protected them, and as the rabbis have said, the patriarchs had observed the entire Torah even before it was given (cf. tractate Yoma 28b). This means that through the loftiness of their souls they were able to attain and enter all the ways of the Lord at the spiritual level of the Torah, which derives from cleaving to the Creator. They did not have to first use the ladder of the positive commandments in the Torah that they were unable to observe at all (as above, section 16). Undoubtedly, both the physical purification and the loftiness of the holy patriarchs’ souls had a deep effect on their descendants and their descendants’ descendants. This merit helped that generation when each of the members of the nation accepted upon himself this lofty work and each said unequivocally, “will we do and obey.” For that reason, we were chosen of necessity as a special nation among the nations.
Thus, only the members of the Jewish nation alone accepted the required mutual guarantee, none of the other world’s nations, which did not partake in it. This is simple because this is what happened. How can Rabbi Elazar dispute that?
<b>Joining of all the world’s people</b><br>20. Universal improvement can only be accomplished when all the people in the world become part of the service of blessed God, as said, “And the Lord shall be king over all the earth; on that day the Lord shall be one, and his name one” (Zechariah 14:9). The verse specifically states, “on that day” but not before. There are also several other verses: “for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord” (Isaiah 11:9), “and all the nations shall flow unto it” (Ibid. 2:2).
<b>The role of the Jews</b><br>But the role of Israel with relation to the entire world is comparable to the role of our patriarchs with relation to the Jewish nation. Our patriarchs’ merit helped us evolve and purify until we become worthy of receiving the Torah. For had it not been for our fathers who had observed the entire Torah before it was given, we would have been no better than the other nations (as above in section 19). Surely, the Jewish nation was also assigned, by means of engaging in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake, to prepare themselves and the entire world population to evolve and receive upon themselves this lofty work of love for one another, which is the ladder leading to the aim of Creation of cleaving to God, as explained.
This way, every commandment that every individual from Israel observes in order to give satisfaction to his maker instead of for the sake of a reward and for self-love produces a certain measure of evolution for the entire population of the world. This does not happen at once but through a slow, gradual development until they increase to such a great degree that they are able to turn all the people in the world toward the desired purification. This is called, using the expression of our sages, tilting [the balance of] to the scale of merit. This means that the scale of the balance reaches the required level of purification. This was likened to weighing using a balance. When the scale tilts, it is the final weight that the measurer sought.
21. When Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, said that the world is judged by its majority, he referred to the role of the Jewish nation in preparing the world for a certain degree of purification until they are ready to accept upon themselves the service of the Creator not less than when the Jews themselves were during the giving of the Torah. According to the words of our sages, it is considered that they attained a majority of merits<sup>1</sup><i class="footnote">Performing more meritorious actions than sins</i> in such a way that they outweighed the scale of sin, which is filthy self-love. Assuredly, if the scale of merit, which is the lofty understanding of the quality of the love for one another, is greater than and exceeds the filthy scale of demerit, they become capable of conceding and agreeing to say “…will we do and obey” just as the Israelites did. Before that, however that is, before they performed a preponderance of merits over sins, surely self-love tilted the balance and they refused to accept the yoke of the Creator.
<b>The individual person’s part</b><br>This is what is meant by, “if he performs one commandment, he is praiseworthy, as he tilts [the balance of] himself and the entire world to the scale of merit.” It means that the Jewish individual personal’s portion is eventually added to the final tilting of the balance. This is likened to someone who weighs sesame, continuing to add it to the scale kernel by kernel until the weighing is concluded. Surely, each one contributes his share to this process, as without him the weighing would be incomplete. It therefore discusses the act of a single Jewish individual, who tilts the entire world to the scale of merit. For when the deed is done, and the balance of the entire world is tilted to the scale of merit, each and every person takes part in this tilting, which, without his actions, would be incomplete. Thus, you find that Rabbi Elazar, son of Rabbi Shimon, does not disagree with the words of the sages that “the entire Jewish people are guarantors for one another.” Rather, Rabbi Elazar speaks about the entire world’s future perfection, while the sages discuss the present, when only the Jews accepted the Torah upon themselves.
22. This is where Rabbi Elazar is supported by the verse, “but one sinner destroys much good” (Ecclesiastes 9:18). It is explained above (section 20). The feeling of influence that comes over a person when engaging in the Torah and the commandments between a person and God is completely identical to the feeling of influence that comes over him when he engages in interpersonal commandments; for he is beholden to perform all the commandments for their own sake with no hope of self-love, meaning that there would be no ray of light or hope reaching back to him of receiving a reward, honor or anything else as a result of this effort. At this zenith, the love for God and the love for others truly merge into one (as said in section 15). Thus, he affects a certain measure of progress along the ladder of love for one another in all the people in the world as a whole, for the level that the individual reaches through his actions, be it a greater or smaller step, eventually combines in the future to tilt the world to the balance of merit, for his share was entered and comingled there for the sake of tilting the balance (as said in section 21). Read there carefully about the comparison to one who weighs sesame seeds.
But someone who commits a transgression – meaning that he was unable to overcome and suppress the filthy self-love, and so committed burglary or the like – tilts himself and the entire world to the scale of demerit. For by exposing the filth of self-love, the lowly nature of Creation again grows strong. In this way, he deducts a certain amount from the final tilting of the balance to the scale of merit. It resembles someone who takes away from the scale of the balance that single sesame seed that another has placed there. By slightly raising the scale of demerit, he turns the world backwards. This is why it is said, “but one sinner destroys much good;” by not being able to restrain himself due to his miniscule desire he causes the spiritual state of the entire world to be pushed back.
<b>The reason for choosing the people of Israel</b><br>23. These words elucidate what we have stated (in section 5) that the Torah was given specifically to the people of the Jewish nation. There is no disagreement that the entire human race as a whole is tasked with the goal of Creation, be they black, white, or yellow, who are essentially the same. But because of the descent of people’s nature to the bottom rung, as explained above regarding the unlimited power of self-love over the entire humankind, there was no way or opening to discuss it with them and explain it to them so they would concede and agree to accept upon themselves, even with a mere promise, to emerge from their narrow boundaries to the wide realm of the love for one another.
The exception was the Jewish nation due to their prior enslavement by the savage Egyptian nation that lasted four hundred years and was accompanied by great and terrible suffering. As we know from the words of the sages, “Just as… salt sweetens the meat… so too suffering cleanses a person’s transgressions” (tractate Berakhot 5a), that is, it greatly purifies the body. In addition, the purification their holy ancestors had undergone supported them (as said in section 16). This is the main point, as brought by several verses in the Torah; and these two antecedents prepared them for it. The verse therefore discusses them in the singular, as said, “and there Israel camped before the mountain” (Exodus 19:2), which the sages have interpreted to mean “as one man and with one mind” (Rashi on Exodus 19:2) since each individual in the nation fully withdrew from self-love and his whole purpose was only to benefit others, as we proved above (section 16) regarding the meaning of the commandment “love your neighbor as yourself.” Read there carefully. Thus, all the individuals in the nation merged and became one mind and one person, because only then were they ready to receive the Torah, as explained.
<b>Tilting the scale by the entire world</b><br>24. Out of that necessity, the Torah was given specifically only to the people of Israel, the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; it was not even conceivable that any stranger would partake in it. For that reason, the Jewish nation was prepared to form a medium of sorts through which purifying sparks would flow to the entire human race throughout the world in such a way that those purifying sparks increase daily like a person giving to the treasure house until it fills up to the required level, that is, until they will evolve to the point of being able to recognize the pleasure and peace that lie in the nucleus of the love for others. For they will understand that they should tilt the balance to the scale of merit and place themselves under the yoke of the Creator; and the scale of demerit will be gone from the earth.
<big><strong>Offer and acceptance</strong></big>
25. All that remains for us now is to conclude our explanation (in section 16) of the reason the Torah was not given to the patriarchs. It is that the commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself” is the axis of the whole Torah around which all the commandments revolve. To explain and interpret it, it must not be observed by individuals alone, but only by prior agreement of an entire nation. This was therefore delayed until their exodus from Egypt when they became capable of observing it. They were first asked whether each individual in the nation agreed to accept this commandment upon himself. Then, when they agreed to this matter, the Torah was given to them. Read there carefully. We still need to explain where we find in the Torah that the people of Israel were asked this question, and that they agreed to it before the giving of the Torah.
26. Know that these matters are clearly apparent to any educated person from the directive that the Holy One, blessed be He, sent to the people of Israel via Moses before receiving the Torah, as said:
“Now therefore, if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then you shall be my own treasure from among all people; for all the earth is mine; and you shall be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. These are the words which you shall speak to the children of Israel. And Moses came and called the elders of the people and laid before them all these words which the Lord had commanded him, and all the people answered together and said, All that the Lord has spoken we will do. And Moses reported the words of the people to the Lord” (Exodus 19:5-8).
The words seemingly do not match their import, since it stands to reason that if someone offers another to perform a certain task and wishes to hear the latter’s consent, he first needs to describe what that work consists of and its pay so that the recipient could consider whether to refuse or agree to it. Yet these two verses do not seem to describe the work or of any compensation for the work. It says, “if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant,” yet it does not explain what the voice or the covenant apply to. It then says, “then you shall be my own treasure from among all people; for all the earth is mine,” which does not derive from it. For it is not clear whether we are commanded to do it, that is, to strive to be a treasure among all the nations, or whether we are given a good promise.
We also need to understand how this is connected to the ending of the verse, “for all the earth is mine.” The three Aramaic translations – of Onkelos, Yonatan ben Uziel, and the Jerusalemite translation – as well as all the commentators are hard pressed to explain the literal meaning of this verse, and Ibn Ezra quotes Rabbi Merinos, interpreting “for” to mean “even though,” interpreting it as “then you shall be my own treasure from among all people; even though all the earth is mine.” He himself concurs. Read there carefully. But this interpretation does not match that of the sages, who said that “for” has four meanings: ‘either,’ ‘in case,’’ but,’ and ‘therefore.’ He adds a fifth meaning – ‘even though.’
The verse concludes with “and you shall be to me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation.” Here too, it is not understood from it whether we are commanded to do it and must strive toward it, or whether it is a good promise. Even the words “a kingdom of priests” are unexplained; nor do they have an equivalent throughout the Bible. Mainly, we must define here, at least, the difference between a kingdom of priests and a holy nation. According to the standard meaning of priesthood, it is on the same level as holiness; it naturally follows that a whole kingdom made of priests is a holy nation, so the words “a holy nation” are redundant.
<b>Service and its reward</b><br>27. Yet according to all the subjects we have discussed from the beginning of the article to this point, the verses are properly explained; their designated role is to become the picture of a negotiation of an offer and an agreement. That is to say, he truly offers them by these words the entire form and content of the matter of work by the Torah and the commandments and the offered reward for it.
The way of service in the Torah and the commandments is expressed in the verse, “and you shall be to me a kingdom of priests.” A kingdom of priests means that all of you, both small and great, shall be like priests; that is, just like priests have no portion or estate, nor any material landed assets, because the Lord is their inheritance, so shall the whole nation be arranged in such a way that the land and all thereof will be consecrated to the Lord. No individual should be engaged in it more than just to observe the commandments of the Lord and fulfill others’ needs. This way, no individual would need to have any concern for his own needs; even daily tasks, such as harvesting, sowing, and the like are considered as equal to the sacrificial offerings that the priests used to perform in the Temple. For what is the difference between observing the commandment to sacrifice burnt offerings to the Lord, which is a positive commandment, and observing the positive commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself”? So, we find that one who harvests his field in order to feed others resembles one who offers sacrifices to the Lord. Moreover, it stands to reason that the positive commandment to “love your neighbor as yourself” is more valuable than offering sacrifices, as we showed above (in sections 14-15; read there carefully).
This is not the end of the discussion. The only purpose the Torah and the commandments were given is to refine the people of Israel with them, which is bodily purification (as above in section 12). Thanks to them, one would later receive the true reward, which is cleaving to blessed God. This is the aim of Creation (as said above in section 6; read there carefully). This reward is expressed in the words “a holy nation” – through cleaving to him we become holy, as said, “You shall be holy; for I the Lord your God am holy” (Leviticus 19:2).
As you can see, the words “a kingdom of priests” express the entire form of service that revolves around “love your neighbor as yourself,” that is, a nation consisting wholly of priests, who have the Lord as their inheritance and have no material possessions of their own. We must admit that this is the only definition of this “kingdom of priests,” because you cannot interpret it as relating to sacrificial offerings on the altar, which could not possibly apply to the entire nation, for who will bring the sacrifices? Also, with regard to receiving priestly gifts, who will be the givers? Also, in interpreting the holiness of the priests, it is already said “and a holy nation.” But the meaning of this necessarily is only that the Lord is their inheritance and they have no material possessions of their own. This is the extent of “love your neighbor as yourself,” that includes the entire Torah, as said; and the words “a holy nation” express the entire form of giving a reward, which is cleaving, as said.
<b>The covenant</b><br>28. This fully clarifies the previous words. It says, “Now therefore, if you will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant,” that is, by forming this covenant that I speak of before you here, with which, “you shall be my own treasure from among all people.” You will be my special treasure in that the purifying sparks and bodily refinement will pass through you to all peoples and all the world’s nations. For all the world’s nations are not yet ready for this at all; yet I need a single nation to begin with now that will be a treasure among all nations.
It concludes with “for all the earth is mine,” to mean that all nations belong to me as you do, and they will eventually cleave to me (as said in section 20). But now, at a time when they are not yet capable of fulfilling this role, I need a special nation. And if you agree to it, that is, to be special among all the nations, I command you to be “a kingdom of priests” which is the level of love for one another at its ultimate character of “love your neighbor as yourself,” which is the axis of the whole Torah and the commandments; “and a holy nation” which is the reward at its ultimate form of “that you may cleave to him” (Deuteronomy 11:22, Ibid. 30:20, Joshua 22:5), to the Creator. This comprises the full reward that can be proclaimed.
The sages have explained to us with the interpretation of the verse’s ending, “These are the words which you shall speak to the children of Israel.” They were very specific: “These are the words,” neither more nor less. This is difficult; from where would it be derived that Moses will do more or less than the words of the Lord to warrant that the Lord must warn him of it? We have not found its likeness throughout the Torah. On the contrary, the verse writes of him, “for he is the trusted one in all my house” (Numbers 12:7).
<b>Neither more nor less</b><br>29. We have a clear understanding of the scope of the work to its ultimate stage as explained by the phrase “a kingdom of priests,” which is the ultimate definition of “love your neighbor as yourself.” In truth, Moses might have been able to conceive delaying and not immediately revealing the type of work with such exceeding grandeur and loftiness for fear that the children of Israel will not agree to abandon all their material possessions and give all their wealth and property to the Lord, as instructed by the words “a kingdom of priests.” Similarly, Maimonides has written that one must not instruct women and children in the nature of pure service that is required to be conducted not for the sake of receiving a reward; but instead wait until they grow and become wiser and muster the courage to carry it out, as said above. God therefore preceded this with the warning of “not less”; they should be offered its true character with all its lofty magnificence expressed in the words “a kingdom of priests.”
The same applies to the matter of the given reward, defined by the words “a holy nation.” Moses could have thought of interpreting and discussing in further details the pleasantness and lofty pleasure hidden in cleaving to blessed God, in order to prepare and draw them near so they will accept and agree to this immense height and withdraw completely from all worldly possessions like priests. Hence, he received the warning of “not more;” instead, he should be silent and refrain from explaining all the facets of the given reward that are included just in the phrase “a holy nation.” The reason is that had he revealed to them this wonderful excess of the reward’s nature, they would certainly have become insane and agreed to serve the blessed One in order to attain this good reward. This is considered self-serving and self-love, and the whole intent would be subverted, as said (section 13). Read there carefully.
This explains why he was told “no less” with relation to the extent of the phrase regarding the form of the work expressed in “a kingdom of priests;” and why he was told “no more” about the vague extent of the reward given expressed in the words “a holy nation.”

Third Discourse; The Essence of Religion and Its Purpose

1. I would like to answer three questions here. The first is about the nature of religion. The second is whether its goal is expected in this world or specifically in the world to come. The third one is whether its goal is for the good of the Creator or the good of people.
At first glance, the reader will be surprised and will not understand the three questions I posed concerning this article, since even children know this. And who does not know what religion is, not to mention its reward and punishment that we look for and expect mostly in the world to come. It is understood regarding the third question; everyone knows that it is for the good of creatures to guide them to goodness and happiness. What more can be added to that?
In truth, I have nothing to add. Everyone is thoroughly familiar with these three topics since childhood, so nothing is added or clarified throughout their lives. This indicates an ignorance of these lofty subjects. And necessarily, these are the foundational principles that the religious structure is built and supported by. Tell me then, can a boy of about twelve or fourteen years possibly have room in his mind to entertain and understand these three subtle subjects? Moreover, can it be sufficient so that there is no need to add any more understanding and wisdom throughout his life? True, here lies the issue. This hasty supposition brought about levity and wild conclusions that filled the air of the world in our generation and brought us to this state where the next generation is almost lost to us.
<big><strong>Absolute Good</strong></big>
2. To avoid wearying the readers with lengthy expositions, I have relied on all that was written and explained in the previous articles, and especially on what was brought in the article “The Giving of the Torah.” They all serve as an introduction to the lofty subject before us. I shall speak here succinctly and with utmost simplicity so anyone can understand.
We should first understand that the Creator is “absolute good,” meaning that it is impossible that he would cause anyone any sorrow. We understand it as the first principle; for common sense clearly shows us that the basis for all evildoers is defined solely by “the desire to receive.” Meaning: a person sets out to harm others out of the desire to receive self-improvement, when he is eager to receive benefit for his own betterment; and he acquires what he wishes for by committing evil against another. It follows that a person who finds no satisfaction in it for himself would harm no one. And if we sometimes find a person that would harm another without any “desire to receive” pleasure for oneself, it is done solely out of an old habit that initially originates in the desire to receive. Habit exempts the person from requiring any new impulse, as we know. And we understand that blessed God is whole in himself and does not need anyone to help him improve, since he preceded everything. It is therefore clear that he has no “desire to receive,” and, having no aspect of “the desire to receive,” he has no impulse to harm anyone. This is very simple.
Furthermore, it is acceptable and agreeable to us that God has “the desire to give” goodness to others, that is, to his created beings. This is proved by the entire great Creation that he created and laid before us. Of necessity, the world has creatures that have either good or bad feelings. The type of feeling surely is caused by the Creator. After knowing with absolute certainty that it is not in the nature of the Creator to cause harm, as explained, surely all created beings receive from him only good as he created them to bestow good on them.
We thus deduce that blessed God has “the desire to give” only good. It can never be imagined that his nature would contain even an ounce of harm or sorrow that would flow from him. We therefore defined God by the name “absolute good.” Knowing that, let us go down and examine how he bestows only good on the actual reality that is guided and directed by him.
<big><strong>God’s Providence is an aim driven providence.</strong></big>
3. We understand from all natural orders presented before us that every small creature belongs to one of four categories: inanimate, plant, animal, or human. Either as a whole or as an individual, we discern in them an aim driven Providence, that is, a slow and gradual evolution that follows a sequential development like the fruit on a tree that is carefully guided toward the aim of eventually becoming a pleasing, delicious fruit.
Ask a botanist how many stages the fruit undergoes from the time it is visible to the eye until it reaches its final stage, when it is fully ripe. All previous stages not only do not exhibit any good example of its sweet and beautiful final product, but as if to spite us display its opposite. That is, the sweeter the fruit at the end of the process, the more bitter and ugly it is at its previous developing stages.
The same is true for the animal and human species. A fully-grown animal is not very clever yet is not hampered as it grows. Humans, however, who are very intelligent when fully grown, are very restricted as they grow. A day-old calf is still called an ox, meaning that it has the strength and the sense of self-preservation to stand on its feet, move about, and avoid the obstacles in its way. But a day-old human is lying by itself as if it is without its senses. Imagine someone not familiar with the nature of the world looking at these two babies; he will surely declare that the human baby, even when it grows, will be good for nothing. But he will proclaim that the animal cub is a second Napoleon. That would be correct if he compared the extent of wisdom of the calf to the senseless human baby that is without use of its faculties.
It is obvious that the reality he created is only in the image of “aim driven Providence,” without considering the order of the developmental stages. For these deceive us and distract us from understanding their purpose, being constantly in an opposite state to their complete work. Regarding such matters, we say that “experienced people are the wisest,” since only the experienced can observe a person throughout his stages of development until he reaches completeness. Such a person can assure people that they must not be wary of the flawed images the person assumes as he matures but trust in his beautiful and clear final stage. (The reason for the gradual sequence any creature has to undergo is explained well by the wisdom of Kabbalah; this is not the place to expound on it).
This thoroughly explains the ways of his Providence in our world; it is an aim driven Providence alone, according to which the quality of goodness is not apparent before the creature reaches the final point of its complete, mature stage. On the contrary, its custom is to always appear to onlookers covered in flaws. Thus, you see that blessed God gives his created beings only good, except that this goodness is dispensed by him by way of an aim driven Providence.
<big><strong>Two paths: the path of suffering and the path of the Torah</strong></big>
4. It has been explained that God is the absolute good and that his providence over us derives from the full measure of his goodness without any admixture of evil. This is carried out by an aim driven Providence, which means that God’s Providence forces us to accept the sequence of different stages that follow the order of cause and effect, that is, antecedent and subsequent. Eventually, we are ready to receive the desired goodness and reach our goal like the beautiful, fully ripened fruit. This lets us understand that we are all assured of this aim; otherwise, you would attribute a blemish to his Providence, claiming that it is inadequate for its purpose, Heaven forbid.
This is what the sages meant by the saying that the Shechinah among people is the requirement of the most high, meaning that His Providence is aim driven, aiming to eventually bring us to cleave to him so it will dwell among us. This is considered the requirement of the most high; that is, if we do not reach this stage we find fault with his providence, Heaven forbid. This is likened to a great king who fathered a son in his old age. The son was very dear to him, so ever since his birth he thought how to improve him; he gathered all the precious books and the best scholars in the country and founded a school for him to study in. He sent for famous constructors and built for him pleasing palaces; he gathered musicians and singers and prepared for him opera houses; he summoned the best cooks and bakers to produce for him the most exquisite delicacies. But when the son grew of age, he turned out a fool who had no desire to study, he was blind and could not behold or sense the beauty of the buildings; he was deaf and unable to hear the voice of singers or musical instruments; and he was diabetic and could only eat coarse bread, and “Thus shall there be contempt and wrath in plenty” (Esther 1:18).
But something that can befall a flesh and blood king cannot be said of God. The notion of falseness surely cannot be attributed to him. He therefore laid before us two paths of development. The first is the path of suffering, which is the evolutionary order of Creation that must in its nature follow and undergo different consecutive stages by way of cause and effect. We slowly evolve through them until we reach the recognition of choosing good and rejecting evil to reach the desired level of preparedness. In truth, this path is of long duration, and full of pain and suffering. He therefore laid before us a pleasant, good path, which is the path of the Torah and the commandments that is capable of preparing us for our goal painlessly and quickly.
What we derive from it is that our final aim is to be prepared to cleave to God so he would dwell within us. This goal is positive, without any departure points to lead us astray, for his Providence has power over us in both paths: the path of suffering and the path of the Torah, as explained. But from a practical standpoint, we find that his Providence reaches us through both ways simultaneously. In the language of our sages, they are called the way of the world and the path of the Torah.
<big><strong>The essence of religion is about developing in us the sense of recognizing evil</strong></big>
5. This is the meaning of the words of the sages: “After all, why should the Holy One, blessed be He, care whether one slaughters an animal from the throat or he slaughters it from the nape? Thus, we learn that the commandments were given only to refine the creations with them” (Bereshit Rabbah 44:1). This issue of refinement was thoroughly discussed in the article The Giving of the Torah (section 12). See what we have written there. Here I shall explain the essence of this evolution attained by engaging in the Torah and the commandments.
Know that it is the recognition of evil within oneself. Engaging in the Torah and the commandments can cleanse the one who is engaged in them in a gradual, slow process of purification. The measuring stick for the levels of purification is the degree of recognizing evil within oneself.
A person is already prepared by nature to reject and exterminate every evil from within him. This is equally true for each and every person. But the difference between one person and another lies solely in the recognition of evil. A more evolved person sees in himself a greater measure of evil and of course banishes and rejects evil from within himself to a greater degree. An unevolved one senses in himself a smaller measure of evil; he therefore pushes away from himself just a small amount of evil and so keeps within him all his filth since he does not recognize it as filth at all.
In order not to weary the reader, we shall discuss good and evil in general, as explained in the article The Giving of the Torah (section 12) that all evil in its entirety is just self-love that is called egoism, since it is directly opposite to the blessed Creator who has nothing of the desire to receive for oneself alone but just to give. As explained there (in sections 9 and 11), the issue of pleasure and bliss is essentially tied to the degree of similarity of form to one’s maker; and the issue of suffering and impatience is essentially tied to the degree of dissimilarity of form to one’s maker (read there carefully). We therefore find egoism detestable; it hurts us since its form is opposite to that of the blessed Creator.
But this rejection is not the same among people but differs among us in terms of degrees. A savage, completely unevolved person does not recognize egoism as a bad quality at all; he therefore openly uses it without shame or boundary. He steals and murders in public as much as he is able. Someone who is somewhat evolved already feels his egoism is evil to a certain degree. He is at least ashamed to practice it publicly and steal and murder openly; he carries out his schemes while being careful not to be seen. Someone even more evolved feels egoism to be truly despicable to the point that he cannot tolerate it but rejects it and pushes it completely away commensurately with his awareness to the point that he does not wish or is able to enjoy the labor of others. Sparks of the love for one another, called altruism, which is the general quality of goodness, begin to awaken within him.
This too flares up within him as he gradually develops. First to develop is the sense of love and sharing for the needs of his family and relatives, as written, “and that you hide not yourself from your own flesh” (Isaiah 58:7). As it develops further, the degree of giving spreads to the people in his environment, such as his townspeople or to the people of his country. It continues until the love for one another develops to encompass the entire humanity.
<big><strong>Conscious evolution and unconscious evolution</strong></big>
6. Know that two forces serve and push us to climb the rungs of that ladder, until we reach its top in heaven, which is the ultimate pinnacle of making our form equal to that of the Creator.
The difference between those two forces is that one pushes us unbeknownst to us, that is, without our choosing. This force pushes us from behind; we define it as the path of suffering or the path of the world. The philosophy of moral doctrine called ethics comes from it. It is founded on acquired awareness, that is, on the analysis of practical understanding that the essence of the Torah is but the sum of the damages caused before our eyes by the seeds of egoism. These experiences befall us by chance, that is, without our knowledge and choosing. But they are sure of reaching their goal because the image of evil becomes clearer to our senses. The more we become aware of its harm, the more we withdraw from it and reach a higher rung on the ladder.
The second force pushes us beknown to us, that is, it is of our own choosing. This force pulls us from in front of us. We defined it as the path of the Torah and the commandments. By engaging in the commandments and the work to give satisfaction to our maker, the sense of the recognition of evil develops in us at an amazing speed, as explained in the article The Giving of the Torah (section 13, read there carefully).
Our gain is twofold. The one is that we do not need to wait for life’s experiences to push us from behind. The entire degree of their push is commensurate only with the amount of pain and destruction brought on us by the existence of evil within us. But through the path of service of God, awareness develops in us not preceded by suffering and destruction. On the contrary, out of the pleasure and bliss that we feel when we serve God to give him satisfaction, we develop in us a relative sense of awareness of the lowliness of these sparks of self-love since they obstruct our way to receive the taste of the bliss of giving to God. This way, the gradual sense of recognizing evil slowly develops in us during times of pleasure and great tranquility, that is, by receiving goodness when serving God while experiencing the pleasure and bliss we deserve as our form becomes identical to its maker. The second is that we gain time; we are aware of its action, and we can serve God more and accelerate the process as we wish.
<big><strong>Religion is not for people’s benefit but for the observer’s benefit</strong></big>
7. Many people make the mistake of comparing our holy Torah to the discipline of ethics. This is because they have never tasted the taste of religion. I recite the verse as applying to them, “O taste and see that the Lord is good” (Psalms 34:9). Both ethics and religion are true; they are directed toward the same thing, which is raising man from the filth of narrow self-love and bring him to the peak of the love for one another. But they are still as far from each other as the Creator’s thought is far from people’s thoughts.
Religion derives from the thoughts of the blessed Creator, while ethics derives from the thoughts of flesh and blood and their life experience. The difference between them is therefore considerable and glaring, both in terms of practicality and the final aim. The recognition of good and evil that develops within us by the discipline of ethics as we practice it is related to social welfare, as we know. But religion is different. The recognition of good and evil that develops within us as we observe it is related to God alone, that is, evolving from dissimilarity of form between form and the Creator to similarity of form with him that is called cleaving, as explained in the article The Giving of the Torah (sections 9-11; read there carefully).
They are also as far away from each other as possible in terms of aim. The aim of ethics is social welfare in terms of practical analysis deriving from life’s experiences. The aim, after all, does not assure the person who practices it that he will evolve above nature. This goal is therefore not above criticism, since who can prove to the individual the degree of goodness awaiting him in his final form, for which he would have to diminish himself to some degree for the sake of social happiness. But religious goal assures the happiness of the person who observes it; for as we have already proven, when a person attains the love for one another, he is in a state of cleaving, which is the similarity between the form and its maker. With it, the person passes from his narrow world that is full of pain and obstacles to an expansive eternal world of giving to God and giving to people.
You will also find a fairly substantial, sharp difference in terms of foundations. The discipline of ethics is supported by a foundation of pleasing people and is like a salary that is paid at the end of the period. When a person is accustomed to such work, he cannot evolve even along the rungs of morality since he is already accustomed to this work that is well paid by an environment that compensate him for his good deeds. But it is different with engaging in the Torah and the commandments for the sake of giving satisfaction to one’s maker without receiving a reward; the person climbs the rungs of morality according to the degree of his effort. There is no payment along his way; but the pennies join into a large sum until he acquires the second nature of giving to one another without any awakening of receiving for oneself except for the necessities of sustenance alone. Thus, he is truly liberated from the confines of Creation. For when a person tires of any receiving for oneself and his soul recoils at any luxuries and tiny physical pleasures, glory, and the like, he is free to travel the world of the Holy One, blessed be He, and is assured that no harm or obstacle will ever befall him. For any harm is felt by a person and befalls him only due to the receiving for oneself that is inherent in him. Understand this well.
8. This clearly explains that the purpose of religion is wholly for the sake of the person that observes it and engages in it. It is not at all for the sake of people or for their benefit, even though all his actions revolve around benefiting people and are judged according to these acts. This is however merely a passage toward the lofty aim of similarity of form to one’s maker. 
With it, we understand that the reward of religion is collected in this world, in living one’s life as explained above. Read well in the article The Giving of the Torah (section 6) about the individual and general aim.

Fourth Discourse; The Essence of the Wisdom of Kabbalah

Before I begin to explain the implications of the wisdom of Kabbalah, a subject already visited by many, I have found it necessary to first thoroughly explain the essence of this wisdom which, in my opinion, few are versed in. Naturally, it is impossible to discuss the effect of a subject before we know the subject itself.
Even though this knowledge is extensive and profound, I shall nevertheless strive with all my might, using the knowledge I gained in this discipline, to give an original interpretation and illuminate it from every angle to make it accessible for every person and arrive at the correct conclusions as they truly are without leaving the readers room for confusing, as often happens when studying these subjects.
<big><strong>What does this wisdom revolve around?</strong></big>
2. This question naturally arises in the mind of every educated person. I shall offer a true, reliable definition to give an adequate answer to this question. This wisdom is neither more nor less than the sequence of roots that derive from each other as a subsequent event would from a preceding one according to absolute, set rules that join to strive for the single lofty goal called “the revelation of his divinity to people in this world.”
This applies both on a general and an individual level:
The general is the entire humanity that must, under absolute obligation, eventually reach this grand evolutionary state, as said, “for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea” (Isaiah 11:9), “and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them” (Jeremiah 31:34), and also, “yet your teacher shall not withdraw himself any more, but your eyes shall see your teacher” (Isaiah 30:20).
What is meant by “the individual” is that before the entire humanity reaches a perfect state, this applies to special individuals in every generation. These individuals in each generation attain certain levels of the revelation of his divinity. They are the prophets and people of renown. As the sages have said, “There is no generation that does not have one like Abraham” (Bereshit Rabbah 74:3), Isaac, and Jacob. So, as you see, the revelation of his divinity takes place in every generation, according to the sages who are qualified to state this and whom we can trust.
<big><strong>The many partzufim, sefirot, and realms</strong></big>
3. These words raise a question. If this wisdom has a single, specific role, as explained, what is the function of the plethora of partzufim, sefirot, and the changing connections that Kabbalah books are filled with?
Let’s take the body of a small animal. Its only role is to sustain itself so it can live long enough to procreate and secure the continuation of its species. Yet you find in it an intricate complexity of myriads of blood vessels and sinews, as physiologists and anatomists have researched and discovered. There are many myriads more that are invisible to the naked eye. From this you can deduce regarding the multiplicity of matters and conduits that need to unite to produce and reveal that lofty aim.
<big><strong>Two directions: downward and upward</strong></big>
4. As a whole, this body of knowledge is divided into two parallel sequences that are identical like two drops of water. The only difference between them is that the first sequence flows down from above to this world, and the second sequence flows up from below through the very same channels and complexities that were imprinted on their root once they appeared and were revealed in a downward order.
The first sequence is called in Kabbalistic terminology the sequence of the devolution of realms, partzufim, and sefirot in all their manifestations, whether they are fixed or in flux. The second sequence is called conceiving or levels of prophecy and the spirit of holiness. A person who attains this is beholden to follow those paths and ways and comprehend every detail and every level slowly and with precision based on the laws inherent in them from the time of their downward emanation.
For the matter of the revelation of God’s divinity is not fully revealed at once as are material objects; instead, it gradually appears within a certain time frame that depends on the purification level of the one who conceives it, until all the myriads of levels that are prearranged in their downward aspect are revealed to him. Since they are consecutively arranged and understood like the rungs of a ladder, they are named levels.
<big><strong>Abstract names</strong></big>
5. Many think that all the words and names used in the wisdom of Kabbalah are considered a type of abstract names. Since it discusses divinity and spirituality that transcend space and time, which not even the eye of the imagination can grasp, it has been decided that surely all that was discussed of such matters is just abstract names or something even more lofty and exalted than abstract names since they are utterly devoid of those imagined foundations.
This, however, is not true; it is the complete opposite. Kabbalah uses these names and appellations only from their real and substantive aspect. The iron rule of all Kabbalists is “Whatever we cannot comprehend we will not define by names or words.” You need to understand that the word conception means the highest level of understanding. It is based on the Biblical phrase “that which your means allow (lit. your hand can conceive),” that is, before something becomes completely clear to our eyes it is as if it is grasped by hand. Kabbalists do not call it conception but use other terms such as understanding, acquiring knowledge, and the like.
<big><strong>The reality in the wisdom of Kabbalah</strong></big>
6. The physical reality that is presented to our senses also includes real objects, even though we cannot grasp or imagine their essence, such as electricity and the magnet, which we consider currents. Nevertheless, no one would say that these names are not real when we recognize their actions to our complete satisfaction. We do not care that we cannot conceive the essence of the subject, that is, the essence of electricity; this term is still real and around us no less than if it were fully grasped by our senses. Even small children recognize the term electricity just as they know names such as bread, sugar, and the like.
Moreover, if you wish to exercise your thinking apparatus, I will say that in general, just as we cannot grasp the blessed Creator, we cannot grasp the level of creatures’ essence, even that of physical, tangible creatures. Thus, any of our acquaintances with our friends and relatives in this world of action is no more than “an acquaintance of actions” that are caused and generated by meeting when our senses encounter them. Those give us complete satisfaction, even though we have no grasp of the essence of the subject. Furthermore, you neither grasp nor conceive your own essence, and all you know of your own essence is no more than a stream of actions that flow from your essence.
From now on, you can easily understand that all the names and appellations that appear in Kabbalah books are also real and substantive, even though we have no conception of the subject. And even though those who engage in them are completely satisfied with having the full knowledge of its ultimate perfection, this too is merely the awareness of the actions that derive from and are generated by the joining of the supernal light with those who attain it. But this is completely adequate, for the rule is that “everything that is meted out and emanates from God’s Providence into the reality of Creation, is completely sufficient (for people’s needs),” just like no person would demand a sixth finger to his hand, because five fingers are enough.
<big><strong>Material properties and physical names in Kabbalah books</strong></big>
7. Every sensible person understands that when we are dealing with a spiritual subject, and obviously with divine matters, we have no words or letters to describe them as our vocabulary is merely made of combinations of the letters of the imagination and the senses. How can they support us where imagination and the senses do not apply at all? Even if we use the subtlest word that can be used in such a context, that is, the word “supernal light” or even “simple light,” this is likened to and borrowed from sunlight, candlelight, or the perceived light of satisfaction a person feels when experiencing a new way to resolve a doubt. How can they be used in a spiritual place and divine paths, seeing that they offer readers only misleading falsehoods?
This is certainly true when we need to use these words to reveal some understanding while discussing the studies of wisdom. Here the wise person must use them with exacting precision with absolute boundaries vis a vis the readers. If the sage makes a mistake when using even a single, inappropriate word, he might bring about confusion among the readers and they would understand nothing he said before or after it, nor anything connected to that word, as known to anyone who peruses the books of wisdom. Figure out then how Kabbalists could possibly use false words and use them to explain the interconnectedness of the wisdom? As we know, false names are indefinite because falsehood does not stand firm and has no standing.
Here you should first know the rule of the root and the branch in connection to the relationship among worlds.
<big><strong>The rule of the root and the branch in the relations among worlds</strong></big>
8. Kabbalists found that the four worlds named Atzilut (Emanation), Beria (Creation), Yetzira (Formation), and Asiya (Action) beginning with the first, highest world called Atzilut down to this material, tangible world called Asiya are completely identical in all their details and aspects; that is, the entire reality and its manifestations present in the first world also exists in the second world below it wholly unchanged; and so on with the following other worlds down to this tangible world.
The only difference among them is that of their levels, which applies only to the matter of every detail existing in every world. The matter of every detail existing in the first, highest world is more rarefied than that of all that is below it. The matter of every detail in the second is denser than in the first world but purer than anything that is on a lower level than it. It continues in this fashion down to this world before us; the matter of every detail existing in it is denser and darker than that of all preceding worlds.
But the forms of every detail in reality and all their manifestations are identical in each world both in quantity and quality, wholly unchanged. This was likened to a signet and that which it stamps. The shapes on the signet pass wholly in all their minute details to that which is stamped by it. It is the same with the worlds; each lower world is stamped by a higher world. Therefore, all the shapes existing in the higher world, in their entire quantity and quality, are fully copied and reach the lower world as well in such a manner that there is no detail or manifestation existing in the lower world that does not have its likeness in a higher world, identically shaped like two drops of water.
They are called the root and the branch, meaning that the detail in the lower world is considered a branch with relation to its likeness situated in the higher world, which is the root of the lower detail. For that detail in the lower world is stamped and shaped by it. This is what the sages meant when they said, “There isn’t a single herb or spice that does not have a constellation in the firmament that smacks it and tells it to grow” (Omissions of the Zohar, Bereshit, section 1; Bereshit Rabbah 10:6), that is, the root that is called a constellation forces it to grow and acquire its characteristics both in quantity and quality, like a signet and that which it stamps, as said above. This is the principle of the root and the branch that applies to all the particulars and occurrences of reality in every world with relation to the one higher than it.
<big><strong>The Kabbalistic language is the language of the branches</strong></big>
9. That means that these branches point to their roots, which are their likenesses that of necessity exist in a higher world. There is no reality in the lower world that does not derive from and is the outcome of a higher world; based on the principle of the signet and that which it stamps, as explained above. For that reason, the root in the higher world forces its branch in the lower world to display its shape and characteristics. This follows the words of the sages that the constellation in the higher world that relates to the herb in the lower world smacks it and forces it to grow according to its own template. From this we derive that every branch in this world is a good representation of its likeness situated in the higher world.
The Kabbalists therefore found a vocabulary that in their opinion is organized and is defined enough to serve as excellent spoken language among them that would enable them to discuss among themselves the spiritual roots in the highest worlds. That is, by just mentioning to their colleagues the low, tangible branch in this world that is well defined by the physical senses, their listeners understand by themselves the highest root that this material branch points at because it is related to it, being imprinted by it, as said. This way, all the details in everything existing in tangible Creation and their manifestations became to them distinct, absolute words and names for the high, supernal, spiritual roots. And even though no word can describe their spiritual location due to their being beyond any imagination, they still acquired the ability to verbally express it by their branches that are accessible to our senses here in this tangible world, as explained.
This is the full character of the language spoken among Kabbalists. Using it, they reveal their spiritual understanding to one another, from one generation to another, both verbally and in writing. And they fully understand each other, to the exact degree required for a discussion of the studies of wisdom. These are precise guidelines that you must not fail to follow because each branch has a natural definition unique to it, and it obviously also indicates its root in the higher world by its absolute definition.
Know that the language of the branches of the Kabbalistic system can explain the concepts of this knowledge more easily than any other language we are accustomed to. We learn from the study of words that languages were corrupt with usage, that is, with constant use the words gradually lose their precise meaning. This created many difficulties in the transmission of precise opinions from one person to another both verbally and in writing, as we know.
This is not the case with “Kabbalah’s language of the branches” that is derived from creatures’ names and occurrences that are laid and set before us defined by immutable natural principles. Listeners and readers would never misunderstand the words offered to them since natural boundaries are too absolute, strict rules.
<big><strong>Transmission by a wise Kabbalist to one who understand by himself</strong></big>
10. Nachmanides wrote of it in the introduction to his commentary on the Torah; Rabbi Haim Vital wrote in the same vein in the article The Steps:
“Let the readers know that they would not understand a single word of anything written in these notebooks unless they are transmitted by a wise Kabbalist to the ear of a recipient that is wise and understand by himself.”
Also, in the words of the sages:
“One may not expound… by oneself the Design of the Divine Chariot, unless he is wise and understands [most matters] on his own” (tractate Ḥagigah 11b).
They said that one must learn from a wise Kabbalist, and this makes sense; but what of the stipulation that the student too must first be wise and understand by himself and that if he is not, even if he is the most righteous man in the world it is forbidden to teach him? Furthermore, if he is already wise and understands on his own, he does not have the need to learn from others.
The above explanation allows you to understand their words quite simply. It has been explained there that none of the words that we utter can explain even a single word of spiritual divine matters that are beyond imaginary space and time, but there is a language specific to these matters, which is the language of the branches that indicate their supernal roots by relating to them.
This language is very well suited to its role of discussing the studies of wisdom, better than regular languages, as discussed above. Still, all this is applicable only if the listener is wise on his own, that is, if he knows and understands the relationships between the branches and their roots. These relationships are not made clear by inferring from the lower to the higher; that is, when observing the lower branches, it is impossible to deduce or imagine any likeness in their higher roots. The opposite holds true: you can deduce the lower from the higher, that is, you first need to understand the supernal roots as they are in their spiritual state beyond imagination by means of complete conception (as explained above, in the chapter “the reality in the wisdom of Kabbalah”). After thoroughly grasping the supernal roots in one’s mind, it is possible to observe the tangible branches in this world and know how each branch is related to its root in the supernal world in all the ways it is organized in terms of quality and quantity. A thorough knowledge and understanding of this allows a common language to form between student and teacher; this is the language of the branches. By using it, the Kabbalist is able to transmit to him all the studies of wisdom that allude to the supernal spiritual realms, both what he received from his teachers and additional understanding of the wisdom that he acquired himself; for they now have a language common to both and understand each other.
But when the student is not wise and does not understand that language on his own, that is, how the branches point to their roots, the rabbi is obviously incapable of explaining to him even a single word of this spiritual wisdom or, needless to say, discuss with him the studies of wisdom since they do not speak a common language and are as if they were mute. Therefore, of necessity, the acts of the divine chariot that are the wisdom of Kabbalah are only transmitted to one who is wise and understands on his own.
We should ask further: according to this, how can the student become knowledgeable enough to recognize the relations between the branch and the root after following the supernal roots? The answer is that “vain is the help of man” (Psalms 60:13, 108:13). We need divine help. For whoever finds favor with God, God fills him with wisdom and understanding and knowledge to learn supernal concepts. One cannot be helped by flesh and blood at all. After finding favor with God and attaining supernal understanding, he is ready to come into and receive from the expanse of the wisdom of Kabbalah through a wise Kabbalist; for now, he shares a common language with him, but not otherwise.
<big><strong>Appellations that are foreign to the human spirit</strong></big>
11. With all that has been explained above you will understand that at times Kabbalah books contain appellations and principles that are very foreign to the human spirit yet are extremely common in the foundational Kabbalistic texts, the books of the Zohar, the Tikunnim, and the books of Arizal. This is very surprising. Why would those sages use such lowly appellations to express these lofty and sacred ideas?
Yet after acquiring the knowledge brought above, you will understand the truth of the matter. It has been explained that you cannot use, for the sake of elucidation of this wisdom, any language or tongue in this world other than the language that is specific for the task, which is “the language of the branches” based on how they are related to their supernal roots. It is therefore obvious that you cannot dismiss any branch or its manifestations because of its low level and not use it to express the desired concept within the complexity of this wisdom, since there is no other branch in the world that can take its place. Just as no two hairs draw from the same follicle (cf. tractate Bava Batra 16a), there are no two branches that relate to the same root.
Thus, if we omit a certain manifestation and not use it, we find that apart from the fact that we lose the spiritual concept that corresponds to it in the supernal realm – as we have no other word to replace it that would indicate that root – this will also harm the wide expanse of this whole wisdom in all its full breadth. For we are missing the one link in the chain of the entire wisdom that is connected to that concept; that person then damages the entire wisdom, because there is no other body of knowledge in the world where matters are merged and interconnected by way of cause and effect, antecedent and subsequent, like the wisdom of Kabbalah, which is literally connected from beginning to end like a long chain. Thus, when we miss a small piece of knowledge, the entire wisdom is lost to us for all its subjects are tightly interconnected and merge into a single whole.
It is no surprise that they sometimes use foreign appellations. They have no freedom of choice when it comes to these appellations, to exchange or replace evil with good or good with evil, but they must bring the precise branch or the manifestation that points to its supernal root to the extent necessary for the subject. They must also discuss these matters at length, until they offer their colleagues who read it with a precise definition.

Fifth Discourse; The Peace

<big><strong>A scientific research based on experience regarding the imperative of service to God</strong></big>
“The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together; and a little child shall lead them” (Isaiah 11:6). “And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, that shall be left, from Ashur, and from Egypt, from Patros, and from Kush, and from Elam, and from Shin’ar, and from Hamat, and from the islands of the sea” (Ibid. 11). “Rabbi Shimon ben Halafta said: the Holy One, blessed be He, found no vessel that could contain blessing for Israel save that of peace, as it is written, ‘The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace’ (Psalms 29:11)” (Mishna, Oktzin 3:12).
1. I have explained the general form of God’s service in previous articles. Its essence is neither more nor less than the love for one another, which, from a practical perspective, can be defined as “giving to one another.” That is to mean, when considering the practical aspect of love for one another, we can only imagine it as bestowing good on others. It is therefore appropriate to define the love for one another as giving to one another. This is a better description of its content, which aims at ensuring we do not forget its intent. After we correctly know the form of God’s service, we need to investigate whether we accept upon ourselves this service by faith alone without any experimental scientific basis, or whether we have an experiential basis for it as well, as I plan to prove in this article.
I first need to fully prove the subject itself, that is, the recipient of our service. I am not an enthusiast of formative philosophy as I hate all kinds of studies built on theoretical basis. Most of my contemporaries agree with me, since we are too well versed in such bases that are rickety foundations: once the foundation is shaken the entire structure collapses. Every word I utter derives solely from a review of acquired understanding, beginning with simple uncontroversial awareness, and continuing with analytical methods until we agree on the ultimate subject. When examining this, using synthetic methods, we shall again arrive at how God’s service is confirmed and validated by this simple recognition from a practical standpoint.
<b>Contrast and contradiction with regard to God’s Providence</b><br>2. Every knowledgeable person who observes the reality laid before our eyes finds in it two extreme opposites. When looking at the orders of Creation, with respect to its existence and layout, it becomes obvious that the leadership is wonderfully blessed with deep wisdom and great competency both in terms of the formative process of the parts of reality and of insuring its existence in general.
Let us take for example the sequence of events deciding a person’s existence. Parental love and pleasure are the basis for a person’s origin, a very safe and trusted method of ensuring their task. And when the foundational drop of semen leaves the father’s marrow, Providence provides it with a safe place that is prepared with great wisdom that enables it to receive the spirit of life. Providence gives it its daily bread there precisely measured, and wonderful lining in its mother’s womb, so that nothing foreign will harm it.
It also tends to all its needs like an experienced wetnurse that will not leave it for a moment until it acquires the strength and ability to see the light of day. Providence then lends it strength and power for a short duration, enough to allow it to break through the walls that surround it. Like an experienced armed mighty man accustomed to it, it forces its way out and is born into the world. Even then, Providence does not leave it but cares for it like a merciful mother, to bring it to such sure trusted friends, called father and mother. They will help it as long as it is weak until it grows and able to fend for itself.
Like humans, animals, plants, and inanimate objects are all cared for with understanding and mercy, until they are able to ensure their own existence and the continuation of their species after them.
To those who observe the maintenance and support of that reality, disorder and great confusion are apparent, as if there is no leader or providence and each person does as he pleases, each builds on his neighbor’s ruins, the wicked become successful while the righteous are pitilessly trampled, and so on.
3. Know that this contradiction laid before every feeling and intelligent person bothered humanity from the earliest days. They employed many systems to explain these two opposites that are seen in God’s Providence and function in the same world.
<b>First system: nature</b><br>According to this very ancient system, there is no way or path to reconcile these two extremes that seem to stand out so much. They reached a supposition that the creator who founded all these things and who uses strong force to preserve its reality so none of it will be lost is without intellect or feeling.
Therefore, even though it produces and preserves the existence of reality with amazing wisdom, it is still unknowing and does all this unknowingly. If it did have the knowledge and the feeling it would surely not allow such flaws in the ways reality is maintained without any pity or mercy on the sufferers. They therefore call it “nature,” meaning it is an unknowing and unfeeling provider. In their opinions, there is nobody to complain to, pray to, or justify oneself before.
<b>Second system: two powers</b><br>Some grew wiser. They found it difficult to accept the supposition of natural providence since they observed Providence over the existing reality that assured its preservation by means of deep wisdom that surpasses any human pinnacle. They could not therefore accept that the provider of all these will itself be unknowing. For how can something give that which is not in it? And can a person instruct and teach another while he himself is a fool? How can it be said of one who presents before us actions performed with wonderfully amazing wisdom that he knows not what he is doing but acts according to chance, when it is obvious to everyone that chance cannot arrange any wisely organized act and, moreover, insure its eternal orderly existence.
They thus reached a second supposition that there are two supervisors and providers, one who creates and preserves good and one who creates and preserves evil. They expanded this method using similar evidence and examples.
<b>Third system: pantheism</b><br>This system was born out of the system upholding two powers. They divided each of the general actions into categories, that is, power, wealth, government, beauty, famine, death, riots, and so on. They appointed a specific provider and supervisor for each of them and expanded it as they saw fit.
<b>Fourth system: he has ceased to act</b><br>Lately, as knowledge accumulated and they saw the strong connection among all the parts of the Creation’s existence, they acknowledged that pantheism is completely unacceptable. The question of oppositionality seen in Providence arose again. This made them form a new supposition that the provider and supervisor that maintains the existence of reality is wise and feeling. But due to his inestimable loftiness, our world is like a mustard seed and like nothing in his eyes. It is therefore not worth his while to deal with our minute affairs. Our sustenance suffer as a consequence, so that every man does whatever is right in his own eyes.
Simultaneously with these methods, there were popular religious systems regarding divine unity; this is not the place to discuss them. I merely wanted to mention the sources where these damaged methods and strange suppositions that had power and were widely spread during certain times and different places originate in.
4. We have learned of the foundation all these methods were built on. It is the product of the opposition and contradiction between the two types of methods of supervision perceived in the world. The purpose of all these systems is to heal this sizable breach.
Yet the world follows its course, and the great and terrible breach not only is not mended but on the contrary, it continues to widen before our eyes into a most terrible chasm without the hope of a way out in sight. When I look at all these experiments that humanity has undertaken for thousands of years to no avail, I ask myself whether the bulk of mending the breach should not be required of the supervisor but is found in our own hands.
<big><strong>The solution</strong></big>
<b>The imperative of caution with regard to natural laws</b><br>5. We all see, out of basic awareness, that the human species requires a communal life, that is, a person cannot exist and support himself without help from the community. Now, imagine the following event. If, for example, an individual retires from society to a secluded place, he will lead a life of sorrow and great suffering since he is too weak to support himself. He should not complain against Providence or his own fate. If he does that, that is, complain and curse his bitter fate, he simply proclaims and announces his own folly; for when Providence gave him a comfortable and acceptable place in society, he has no right to withdraw from it to a deserted place. Such a person must not be pitied since he goes against the nature of Creation, having the choice to live as Providence decreed. It is therefore he who is merciless. This law is accepted by all members of humanity and none disagrees.
I can add and stress the issue from a religious angle and rephrase it as the following rule: Providence over Creation derives from the Creator, who, undoubtedly, has a purpose in his actions; for no one acts purposelessly. Thus, whoever acts against one of the natural law that God imprinted on us, of necessity blemishes the ultimate aim, which is undoubtedly based on all natural laws together, not one is missing. It is fitting for a smart worker to neither diminish nor add even hairbreadth to the actions that the goal necessitates. Thus, whoever violates a single law, his violation damages and harms the ultimate aim that blessed God has set. Nature will therefore punish him. We, God’s creatures, must therefore have no pity on him, because he desecrates natural laws and shows contempt against God’s aim. This, in my opinion, is the order of the sentence.
I think that it is not worthwhile to anyone to disagree with the form I gave the sentence since the wording is the same. Where lies the difference if they say that the supervisor is called nature, that is, unknowing and aimless, or that the supervisor is amazingly wise, knowing, and feeling, and that his actions are purposeful? Eventually, we all agree and accept that we have the duty to observe Providence’s commandments, that is, natural laws. And we all agree that whoever transgresses Providence’s commandments, that is, natural laws, is worthy and deserving of the punishment meted out by nature, and no one should have mercy on him. Thus, the law has a cohesive character and the only disagreement is about motive. In their opinion, a motive is necessary; and in my opinion, it relates to the aim.
To spare me the need to mention both terms – nature and Providence – seeing that there is no disagreement regarding the upholding of the laws as I have proven, it is best that we compromise and accept the words of the Kabbalists that “the nature (<i>hateva</i>)” is numerically “God (<i>Elohim</i>),” that is, eighty-six. I can then call God’s laws by the name nature’s commandments or the other way round because they are the same, and there is no need for a lengthy, futile discussion.
6. It is very important now to observe nature’s commandment, to understand what it demands of us lest it punish us mercilessly, as we know.
We have said that nature requires the human species to lead a communal life. This is simple; yet we need to observe the commandments that nature requires us to observe from that angle, that is, that of communal life. When we look at it as a whole, we need to discuss just two social commandments. They can be defined as “receiving,” and “giving,” meaning that each member must, according to nature, receive his needs from the community; he is also beholden to benefit the community through his work. If he transgresses one of these two commandments, he will be mercilessly punished, as said.
With regard to the command to receive, we do not need to scrutinize it at length since punishment is meted out immediately. For that reason, it will not be neglected. But regarding the second commandment, which is “giving to the community,” punishment is not meted out immediately. Furthermore, we are not punished proportionately.
Therefore, this commandment is not properly observed, and so humanity is fried over the fire in a terrible pan; and the sword, famine, and their consequences have not ceased to this day. It is a wonder that nature judges us like a professional judge, considering our stage of evolution; for, as we see, the more humanity evolves, the more suffering and pain we undergo to attain our support and sustenance.
A scientific, experimental basis is presented before you, showing that we are commanded by his Providence to observe, with our very being, the commandment of “giving to one another” with the utmost precision. This way, none of the members will work less than the full measure that assures a thriving, happy community. As long as we are too lazy to uphold this to its full extent, nature will not stop punishing us and take its revenge upon us. According to the plagues we are struck with at this time, we also have to consider the drawn sword before our eyes and must reach the correct conclusions, for eventually nature will have the upper hand and we will all have to come together to observe its commandments to the fullest extent required of us.
<b>Proving his service by experience</b><br>7. One criticizing my work can still argue that I have only proved that people must work, but where is the practical proof that we should observe a certain commandment for the sake of God?
History itself accomplished the task for us and prepared for us a full case, enough for us to have a full evaluation and reach irrefutable conclusions. Everyone sees how a large community, such as Russia, with a population of hundreds of millions, with lands at its disposal larger than those of the whole of Europe, with assets of raw material almost unparalleled in the entire world, agreed to live a cooperative life and practically abolished all personal possessions. No one has any other care but for the good of the community. They seemingly acquired the good quality of “giving to one another” in its fullest sense, as much as the human mind can encompass.
Yet, regardless, see what befell them. Instead of rising and progressing above bourgeois countries, they kept deteriorating to the point that not only they are incapable of ameliorating workers’ lives even a little bit beyond those of workers in bourgeois countries, but they are also unable to ensure them their daily bread and cover their nakedness. This fact is very confusing. Judging by the wealth of this country and its large population, it should not have reached that point based the human thinking.
8. But this nation has committed the single sin that God will not forgive them for; it is that this precious and lofty work of “giving to one another,” which they started practicing, must be for the sake of blessed God, not for humanity’s sake. Not working for God’s sake, they have no right to exist from nature’s point of view.
Try to imagine every single person in that community careful to observe God’s commandment to the extent of the verse, “And you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might” (Deuteronomy 6:5), and to the same extent take care to fulfill his neighbor’s needs and wishes to the same extent inherent in the person’s nature to fulfill his own wishes, as said, “love your neighbor as yourself.” Had God himself been the aim of every worker while working toward social welfare, that is, had the worker expected that by his work for the sake of the community he would attain cleaving to God, to the source of all that is true and good and blissful and soft, there would be no doubt that in very few years they would have risen above all the world’s countries combined, because they would be then able to utilize all the troves of raw materials in their rich soil and would truly be a miraculous example to all countries and would be called “blessed of the Lord” (Isaiah 65:23).
But now, when the whole amount of work of “giving to one another” is based solely on the community alone, it is a rickety foundation since who and what will oblige the individual to do more and make efforts in the name of society? There is no hope for the world in this dry and lifeless principle, to motivate even evolved people, not to mention unevolved ones. The question was therefore raised what would motivate the worker or farmer and induce him to work? His daily bread would be neither more nor less if he would spend his strength without any goal or reward set before him. Biologists know that a person would not make even the smallest movement without motivation, that is, without self-benefit. For example, when someone moves his hand from the chair to the table it is because he thinks that placing his hand on the table will be more beneficial. Without thinking this way, he would keep his hand on the chair and not move it until ripe old age. This applies even more to great effort.
If you suggest solving it by placing supervisors so that if someone drags his feet while working, he would be punished and his sustenance would be taken from him, let me ask you, tell me, what will motivate the supervisors themselves to work? Standing in one place and supervising people to direct them to exert themselves also involves a great effort, possibly greater than the work itself.
9. It therefore seems like someone who tries to start a machine without fueling it. They are destined by nature to fail since natural laws will punish them for not being able to carry out its commands themselves and perform these acts of giving to one another as God’s service in order to observe it and reach through it Creation’s ultimate aim of cleaving to God, as explained in the article The Giving of the Torah (section 6). This state of cleaving reaches the observing person like the measure of his pleasant and blissful abundance that gradually increases until it attains the desirable amount that allows him to be elevated by recognizing God’s truth, growing until he acquires the highest state alluded to in the verse, “neither has the eye seen… god, beside you” (Isaiah 64:3).
Imagine to yourself that if the farmer and the worker would have before them this aim while working for social happiness, they would certainly need no supervisors over them because they would already be motivated to be completely content making great efforts to raise the community to the pinnacle of happiness. The truth is that understanding matters this way requires great care and reliable organization, but everyone sees that only the tenacious and uncompromising nature grants them the right to exist. This is what I wanted to prove here.
10. I have clearly proven to you, based on experiential understanding, from historical events that unfold before our eyes, that the only remedy in the world for humanity is that they should accept upon themselves Providence’s command to give to one another in order to give satisfaction to God, based on two verses. The one is “love your neighbor as yourself,” which characterizes the service itself. It means that the degree of the effort in giving to another for social benefit should be no less than the degree impressed on each individual to care for his own needs. Furthermore, they need to give others’ needs precedence over their own; as explained in the article The Giving of the Torah, section 4. The second verse is “And you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your might.” This is the aim that must be envisioned by everyone while toiling to fulfill the needs of others. It instructs us that people should act and strive only to find favor in the eyes of God, who said of those who perform his bidding.
“…if you are willing and obedient, you shall eat the good of the land” (Isaiah 1:19), “For the poor shall cease out of the land” (v. Deuteronomy 15:11) and there will be no one who is tortured or exploited throughout the land. Each one’s happiness will increase beyond any estimation. But as long as you are reluctant and do not wish to enter the covenant of the service of God to the extent mentioned before, nature and its laws are ready to take their revenge on us and will not let go, as we have clearly proven, until it will vanquish us and we will accept its authority and anything that it will command us, as explained.
I have presented you with a scientific, practical study based on the analysis of practical knowledge, that all people are under absolute obligation to accept upon themselves God’s work with their whole heart, soul, and being.
<b>Interpretation of the Mishna “Everything is placed in pledge, and a net is spread over all the living”</b>
11. Having known all that was said, we can now gain understanding of this unclear Mishna in tractate Avot. This is what it says, 
“He (Rabbi Akiva) would also say: Everything is placed in pledge, and a net is spread over all the living. The store is open, the storekeeper extends credit, the account-book lies open, the hand writes, and all who wish to borrow may come and borrow. The collection-officers make their rounds every day and exact payment from man, with his knowledge and without his knowledge. Their case is well founded, the judgment is a judgment of truth, and ultimately, all is prepared for the feast” (tractate Avot 3:16).
This Mishna has not remained unclear without a reason, an allegory without any allusion as to its significance. This indicates that there is great depth to fathom here. It is well explained based on the knowledge we have acquired so far.
<big><strong>The wheel of the transformation of form </strong></big>
12. I shall first offer the opinion of our sages regarding the devolution of the world’s generations. Even though we see that bodies change with the passage of generations, this applies only to bodies. Souls, which are the main part of the body’s essence, are never absent as temporary objects must be. Those souls present during the generation of the Flood were transported into the generation of the Tower of Babel, then into the exile in Egypt, to those who left Egypt, and so on, to this generation and the end of the perfecting process. This way, there are no new souls as there are bodies but only an exact number of souls that reincarnate on the wheel the transformation of form<sup>1</sup><i class="footnote">The Hebrew word for reincarnation (gilgul) derives from wheel (galgal)</i> since each time the soul is newly enclothed in a new body and in a new generation.
Therefore, from the soul’s point of view, all generations from the time of Creation until the end of the perfecting process, are considered a single generation that extended its life by several thousand years until it evolved and reached its perfected, proper state. It is of no importance, from this point of view, that in the meantime each soul changes bodies several thousand times; the body’s essence, called the soul, did not undergo any of these changes.
There are a lot of proof and extraordinary wisdom that is called the mystery of reincarnation, though this is not the place to discuss it. However, due to the immense scope of the issue that one who is not knowledgeable in this wisdom faces, it should be mentioned that reincarnation applies to every detail of tangible reality. Everything leads an eternal life in its own way, and even though we perceive through our senses that everything exists and then deteriorates, this is merely what meets the eye. In truth, these are merely phases of reincarnation. No individual detail rests or remains still even for a single moment but reincarnates over the wheel of the transformation of form, losing nothing of its essence while it moves on; physicists have discussed this at length by.
13. We now arrive at the interpretation of the Mishnaic verse, which states, “Everything is placed in pledge.” The matter was likened to a person who lent another a sum of money to start a business so he would be his partner and split the profit with him. To be assured that he would not lose his money, he gave it to him with a pledge and was thus free of worry. Such is the creation and maintenance of the world. God prepared it for people to engage in and eventually attain through it the exalted aim of cleaving to God, as explained in the article The Giving of the Torah (section 6; read there well). But can we even conceive someone forcing humanity to engage in God’s service so they will reach this exalted and lofty aim at the end? Rabbi Akiva therefore says, “Everything is placed in pledge,” meaning that nothing that the Creator presented at the Creation and has given to people was for free. He insured himself with a pledge.
And what pledge, might you ask, was given to him? He answers that with “a net is spread over all the living”; meaning that God acted wisely and cast such a miraculous net over the entire humanity that none can escape, but all the living must be trapped in that net and accept upon themselves God’s service until they attain their lofty goal. This is God’s pledge with which he ascertained that he would not be troubled by the act of Creation.
14. He then explains the subject in detail, saying that “The store is open,” meaning that even though this world seems to us as an open store without owners, and any passerby can take merchandise and goods as he wishes for free and without account, Rabbi Akiva warns us that “the storekeeper extends credit,” meaning that even though you do not see any storekeeper here, know that there is a storekeeper. He does not demand payment since he extends credit.
And if you ask, how does he track his accounts, he answers that “the account-book lies open, the hand writes,” meaning that there is a general account book where each and every deed is written, so none of it is lost. This refers to the law of evolution that the Holy One, blessed be He, imprinted on humanity, which urges us always onward.
It means that detrimental behaviors present during human stages themselves cause and create good stages; and each good stage is no more than the fruit of the labor of the evil stage that preceded it. The values of good and evil do not refer to the state in itself but to the general goal. Each state that brings humanity closer to the goal is called good; and that which draws them further from the goal is called evil.
The law of evolution is based solely on this value. Deterioration and evil formed during a certain state are considered the cause and produce the good state in such a way that each state lasts just enough time to increase evil within it to such a degree that the public cannot tolerate it. The public must then gather against it, destroy it, and settle into a better state to improve that generation. Similarly, the new state lasts until the sparks of evil in it grow and mature to an unbearable extent and must then be destroyed to construct an easier state in its stead. Those states improve, one after the other, level by level, until they reach a state so perfected that it is wholly devoid of evil sparks.
You will find that the seeds and kernels out of which the good states emerge are none other than the evil actions themselves, that is, all evil produced at the hands of the generation’s wicked people combine and multiply until they assume such weight that the public cannot withstand so they rise to destroy it and create a more favorable state. Thus, you see that each individual wickedness becomes a requirement to the force that urges the right state to evolve from it.
In the words of Rabbi Akiva, “the account-book lies open” since each state that a certain generation is in resembles an account book, and all evil doers resemble writing hands; for every evil deed is engraved and written down in the account book until they add up to a number that the public can no longer tolerate. They then destroy this evil state and settle into a more favorable state, as explained. Thus, each action becomes part of the account and they are written down in a book, that is, in the said state.
15. He adds, “and all who wish to borrow may come and borrow,” referring to those who do not believe that this world resembles an abandoned, ownerless open store. Instead, there is a storekeeper here in this world standing by his store and demanding that each person who takes something will pay the quoted price for the merchandise he takes from it, that is, he should strive to serve God while he is supported by that store in the best and surest way that will enable him to reach the aim of Creation, as God wishes. It is considered that such a person “wishes to borrow,” that is, before he extends his hand to take something from this world, which is the store, it is as if he takes a loan to pay its asking price; that is, he takes it upon himself to work and reach God’s aim while he is supported by the store, by faithfully promising to pay his debt by reaching the intended result. He is therefore called one who “wishes to borrow,” which means he is indebted to pay off the debt.
Rabbi Akiva paints for us two types of people. The first type is those that relate to “The store is open.” They think of this world as an open store without an owner storekeeper. He says of them, “the account-book lies open, the hand writes,” meaning that even though they do not see any account, still “all their deeds are written in a book” (v. Tractate Avot 2:1). As explained above, this is facilitated by the evolutionary law that is embedded in Creation in spite of humanity since the wicked people’s actions themselves of necessity produce good deeds, as explained above.
The other category of humanity is called those who wish to borrow; they are considerate with the owner and when they take something from the store, they only take it as a loan and promise the storekeeper to pay him the allotted price, namely, to attain through it the ultimate aim. He says of them, “and all who wish to borrow may come and borrow.”
16. What is the difference, you might ask, between the first category of people who reach the ultimate aim that is forced on them through the law of evolution, and the second category for whom the ultimate aim is attained when they submit themselves to God’s service? After all, both are equal in attaining the goal. He therefore continues, “The collection-officers make their rounds every day and exact payment from man, with his knowledge and without his knowledge,” that is, it is true that both equally pay their debt by instalments daily. And just as the special powers that appear with the engagement in God’s service are considered the faithful collection officers that exact payment by instalments daily until the debt is fully repaid, the strong forces embedded in the evolutionary law are equally considered faithful collection officers that exact payment by instalments daily until the debt is fully paid; as said, “The collection-officers make their rounds every day and exact payment from man.”
Still, there is a great difference and distance between them, which is, “with his knowledge and without his knowledge.” The debt of those in the first category is collected by the collection officers of evolution. They collect their debt “without their knowledge.” Instead, the stormy waves that are flung on them by the strong evolutionary wind push them from behind and force people to move forward. The debt is collected against their will with the great suffering of the manifestation of the forces of evil that push them from behind.
But those in the second category willingly pay their debt, which is attaining the aim “with their knowledge.” They do so when they repeat the special actions that accelerate the evolution of the sense of the recognition of evil in the way explained in the article The Essence and Purpose of Religion (section 6; study there well). With this service their gain is twofold.
The first benefit is that the forces that manifest with God’s service are present before them as an attracting force, pulling from the front like magnetic attraction. They run towards it, attracted by it willingly, moved by yearning based on the spirit of love. Needless to say, they are devoid of any sorrow or suffering that the first category undergoes. The second benefit is that they hurry toward the desired outcome, because they are the righteous and the prophets that attain the aim in every generation, as explained in the article The<b> </b>essence of the wisdom of Kabbalah (section 2)?
As you can see, the distance between those who pay knowingly and those who pay unknowingly is as great as the light of bliss and pleasure excels over the darkness of suffering and vicious pain.
17. He further says, “Their case is well founded, the judgment is a judgment of truth,” that is, he promises all those who pay willingly and knowingly that “Their case is well founded,” as great power lies in the ability of God’s service to draw them to the lofty aim, and it is worth their while to submit to God’s yoke.
Of those who pay without their knowledge, he says “the judgment is a judgment of truth.” It is seemingly astonishing that God’s Providence allows and permits all the misdeeds and suffering to manifest in the world, in which humanity is boiled mercilessly.
He therefore says that “the judgment is a judgment of truth,” since “all is prepared for the feast,” that is, for the true ultimate aim and the celestial bliss that will be revealed with the manifestation of God’s purpose for Creation, according to which all the effort and toil and suffering that keep coming throughout generations and eras resemble a host who works hard and labors to prepare a large banquet to invited guests. The predicted goal that will eventually manifest itself is likened to the banquet in which the guests are seated and enjoy themselves. He therefore says, “the judgment is a judgment of truth, and ultimately, all is prepared for the feast,” as explained.
18. You will find a similar argument that discusses man’s creation in Bereshit Rabbah, as follows:
The ministering angels asked “the Holy One, blessed be He, ‘Master of the universe, ‘what is man, that you are mindful of him? And the son of man, that you visit him?’ (Psalms 8:5). This trouble, why should it come about? He said to them: ‘If so, ‘all sheep, and oxen, and also the beasts of the field’ (Ibid. 8) why were they created? … This is analogous to a king who had a tower filled with all manner of fine things, but he had no guests. What pleasure does the king derive from having filled it? They said before him: ‘Master of the universe, ‘O Lord our Lord, how majestic is your name in all the earth’ (Ibid. 12) – do what pleases you’” (Bereshit Rabbah 8:6-7).
Commentary: the angels saw all the pain and suffering that will be visited upon humanity so they wondered and asked, “This trouble, why should it come about?” The Holy One, blessed be He, responded that he does have a tower filled with fine objects, and no other guests invited except for this humanity. The angels considered the pleasures in this tower that awaits its guests against the suffering and troubles expected to befall humanity. Having seen that it is worthwhile for humanity to suffer for the expected good that awaits us, they agreed to the creation of man, that is, exactly as Rabbi Akiva said, “the judgment is a judgment of truth, and ultimately, all is prepared for the feast.” For ever since the beginning of Creation, all people were marked as guests, whom the Creator’s plan compels to come to the feast knowingly or unknowingly, as explained.
<big><strong>World peace</strong></big>
19. This explanation will reveal to everyone the truth in the words of the prophet in his prophecy of peace that begins with, “The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid…” (Isaiah 11:6) and the reason he gives is that “the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea” (Isaiah 11:9). It follows that the prophet made world peace conditional on the whole world being full of the knowledge of the Lord, that is, exactly as we said above. The fierce, egotistical opposition between one person and another, and the acrimonious international relations which it brings, all these will pass from the world not by any form of human device or trick. For we see with our own eyes how the miserable sick patient tosses and turns in human pains that nothing mitigates; humanity has already thrown itself into the extreme right, as did Germany, or into the extreme left, as did Russia. But not only did they not alleviate the situation but they aggravated the disease and the pain, and its sounds reached high heaven, as we all know.
Thus, there is no other stratagem but to come to accept God’s yoke through the knowledge of the Lord, that is, to direct their actions to please the Lord and reach his aim, as he planned for them prior to the Creation. When they do that, it is clear to everyone that every trace of jealousy and hatred will be completely erased from humanity, as I have clearly demonstrated by these words so far. All the members of humanity will merge into a single body with a single heart that is filled with the knowledge of the Lord. Thus, world peace and the knowledge of the Lord amount to the same thing.
<b>Peace is a means for redemption</b><br>20. This is immediately followed by the words of the prophet, “And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people… and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth” (Isaiah 11:11-12). We learn from this that world peace precedes the gathering of the exiles.
We will now understand the words of the sages at the end of tractate Oktzin, “the Holy One, blessed be He, found no vessel that could contain blessing for Israel save that of peace, as it is written, ‘The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace’ (Psalms 29:11)” (Mishna, Oktzin 3:12).
We are first surprised by the eloquent phrase regarding a “vessel that could contain blessing for Israel.” Also, how can we deduce such an opinion from this verse?
But this verse is interpreted like Isaiah’s prophecy that world peace precedes the gathering of the exiles. The verse therefore says, “The Lord will give strength unto his people” which means that blessed God will give his people Israel strength, that is, eternal revival. Then, “the Lord will bless his people with peace,” meaning that he will bless his people Israel before blessing the entire world with peace. He then adds, “the Lord shall set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people…”
That is how the sages interpreted the verse; blessing of the entire world preceded strength, that is, redemption, since “the Holy One, blessed be He, found no vessel that could contain blessing for Israel save that of peace,” that is, as long as self-love and egoism dwell among the nations, even the children of Israel would be unable to serve the Lord with the purity of giving to one another, as explained in the interpretation of the verse, “and you shall be to me a kingdom of priests” (Exodus 19:6) in the article Mutual Guarantee. We learn from experience that coming into the land of Israel and constructing the Temple could not last and bring the blessings that God swore to our fathers.
This is what is meant by, “the Holy One, blessed be He, found no vessel that could contain blessing,” meaning that the children of Israel did not yet have a vessel that could contain the blessings of the fathers; therefore, the oath that we will inherit the blessing of the land forever was not yet upheld, because world peace is the only vessel that allows us to receive the blessing of the fathers, as said in Isaiah’s prophecy.

Sixth Discourse; The Freedom



Chapter 1

“‘…engraved upon the tablets’ (Exodus 32:16) … Do not read it as <i>ḥarut</i> (engraved), but rather <i>ḥerut</i> (freedom) (which teaches us it is) freedom from the angel of death” (Shemot Rabbah 41, 7).
This article requires an explanation. What does the receiving of the Torah have to do with liberating people from death? Furthermore, having attained through the receiving of the Torah an eternal body, over which death has no power, how did they again lose it? Could the eternal become something lacking?
<big><strong>Freedom to want</strong></big>
1. To understand the lofty notion of ‘freedom from the angel of death,’ we first need to understand the notion of freedom in its ordinary sense, according to popular understanding. According to the general view, freedom can be considered a natural principle that applies to all living beings. We see how animals die under us when we rob them of their freedom. This is a true testimony that Providence refuses the enslavement of any creature. Not without a reason did humanity fight in the last few centuries until it achieved a certain degree of individual freedom.
<b>Does man act according to free will</b><br>2. Still, we find the notion expressed by the word freedom to be very vague. If we penetrate the innermost part of this word barely anything remains. For before seeking individual freedom, you should assume that every individual has the capacity called freedom, meaning, is capable of acting according to free will.
Yet when we examine the individual’s actions, we find them coerced, that he is compelled to carry them out, not by choice. In that, he resemble a dish set on the stove, which must boil and be cooked whether it likes it or not. Providence bound all living things with the two straps of pleasure and pain, and no animal has free will to choose suffering or reject pleasure.
The advantage humans have over animals is that a person can envision a distant goal, that is, accept a certain amount of pain now by choosing future pleasure or benefit after a certain time. But in truth, there is no more here than commercial calculation, meaning that they value future pleasure or benefit as better and more advantageous than the suffering they undergo and the pain they accepted upon themselves now. It is merely a case of deduction; they deduct the pain and suffering from the expected future pleasure and still have something extra. They are of necessity attracted only to pleasure. It also sometimes happens that they deceive themselves, since the pleasure they achieved is not greater than the suffering they endured, as they hoped. They thus incur a deficit. This all follows the merchant’s way of thinking.
Everything considered, there is no difference between humans and animals. In that case, there is no conscious free choice but a strong magnetic force, which attracts them to pleasure that comes their way in any form, and which makes them flee from causes of pain. By means of these two, Providence brings us to all the places desirable to it, never asking our permission.
Moreover, even deciding on the character of pleasure and benefit is not based solely on the individual’s choice and free will but on the wishes of others, [based on] their wishes rather than the individual’s. For example, I am seated, I am dressed, I speak, I eat – not because I want to sit this way, dress this way, speak this way, and eat this way – but because others wish me to sit this way, dress this way, speak this way, and eat this way; that is, according to social wishes and norms instead of my own free will. Furthermore, I do most of these against my will. I am more comfortable being seated comfortably occupying the entire chair; I want to dress without fuss, and I want to eat whatever comes my way anywhere – yet I am inhibited in all my actions and am shackled by the iron chains of social reasons and customs. It follows that the individual has no will or opinion over which he can claim freedom. Whatever he claims he does so for reasons and customs of others, that is, society. Tell me, then, where is my free will?
3. On the other hand, if we suppose there is no free will, each of us is nothing more than a machine that operates and manufactures by means of external forces that compel it to do so. Thus, each one of us is imprisoned in the prison of Providence that, by its two straps of pleasure and pain, pulls and pushes us as it wishes to where it desires. In that case, there is no individual entity in the world since there is no free, independent person here: I am not the actor, nor do I act because I wish to act but because I am being acted on in spite of myself and unbeknownst to me. In that case, are reward and punishment exchanged?
This is utterly weird – not just to religious people who believe in God’s Providence. They at least can be assured and trust that he leads with a good and desirable aim for us – but it is even weirder to those who believe in nature. According to what has been said, each one is shackled by the chains of blind, unknowing, and uncalculating nature. And we, the choicest creatures, educated and intelligent, become like toys in the hands of a blind, deceitful nature that leads us, who knows where?!
We should take the time to understand such an important concept, that is, how do we exist this way in the world as an entity with being, each of us feeling like a unique being that acts on its own cognizance, independent of foreign, unknown, external forces? In what way does this entity of being appear to us?
In truth, there is a connection among all the details in reality before us, which gradually, sequentially progresses according to the law of causality. Just like the whole acts, so does each specific individual in itself. That is, the law of causality applies to each creature in the world – of the four categories of inanimate, plant, animal, and human – in a sequential order. Furthermore, each individual stage, guided by individual Providence, that the creature assumes while it exists in the world, is forced by former factors that compelled it to undergo the transformation inherent in its conduct, absolutely no other. This is clear to those who observe natural orders, from the perspective of pure science unmixed with any personal preference.
We therefore must analyze this to allow us to observe it from every side and angle.
<b>The four factors in every transformation</b><br>4. Know that every change that creatures undergo must be understood not as the result of something out of nothing but of something out of something, that is, an actual essence that was divested of its former shape and assumes a form that takes shape now.
We therefore must understand that four factors are combined into anything that takes shape in the world. That formation emerges and is set by the four together. They are called 1) character, 2) the unchanging sequential dynamics that apply to the character’s trait in itself, 3) the inner sequential dynamics that change when they come into contact with external forces; 4) the sequential dynamics of external objects that act on it from outside. I shall discuss them one by one.
The first cause is the character, which means the primal matter that relates to this transformation for “There is nothing new under the sun” (Ecclesiastes 1:9) and every transformation taking place in our world is not out of nothing but is something out of something. A certain entity shed its former shape and assumed another one, different than the former. The essence that is divested of its previous shape is defined as the character, wherein lies the future potential to appear and be set in the final shape of that transformation. It is therefore considered its main cause.
The second cause is the unchanging sequential order that affects the quality of the character itself. Take for example, wheat that decomposed in the ground in the process of sowing wheat berries. This decomposed state is called the character [that is, the first said cause]. Meaning, we need to understand here that the essence of wheat shed its former shape, that is, the shape of wheat, and assumed a new aspect in the form of rotten wheat, which is the seed that is called the character, devoid of any shape. Now that it has decomposed in the soil, it is capable of assuming another shape, that is, the form of wheat that can grow and emerge out of the character, which is the seed.
We all know that this character will not assume the shape of either corn or oats but will relate only to the former shape, which is gone from it, which is wheat alone. It changes to a certain extent, both in quantity and quality, as a single stalk of wheat became ten stalks, and in terms of taste and beauty; yet the main shape of wheat does not undergo any change.
Thus, there is an unchanging sequential order that affects the quality of the character in itself. No oat will spring out of wheat, as we discussed. This is considered the second cause.
The third cause is the sequence of the inner dynamics that change due to contact and encounter with external forces in its environment, with which it comes in contact. Meaning, we find that many stalks of wheat come out from a single wheat berry that decomposed in the soil. At times, they are better than what the wheat used to be before it was sown. Thus, of necessity, there are additional factors that joined and combined with the original character’s inherent potential. This is the reason for the additional [traits], both in quality and quantity, which were not present in the former wheat stalk. These are [factors] originating in the environment, that is, compounds and minerals in the soil, rain, and sun. All these acted on it by pouring of their forces and joined the force lying dormant in the character itself in a sequential order, and they produced the proliferation in quality and quantity in that transformed character.
We should understand here that the third cause joins the inner character. For the character’s latent force has power over them (the factors). All considered, these changes do not go beyond the traits of wheat, that is, they all belong to the genus wheat, not any other genus. We therefore define them [too] as ‘inner factors.’ But they are different from the second cause that does not change in any respect, unlike the third cause, which changes both in quality and quantity.
The fourth cause is the sequential order caused by external objects that act on it from outside. Meaning, they do not directly affect wheat like minerals, rain, and sun. They are foreign to it, such as neighbors in its proximity, and outer occurrences such as hail, wind, etc.
Thus, you find that these four factors join wheat while it grows. Every individual stage that wheat undergoes during that time is conditioned by the four, which determine the stage’s quantity and quality.
<b>The four factors in every mature quality</b><br>5. Just as we described in relation to wheat, this is the principle governing any kind of transformation in the world, even thoughts and quality. Take for example, the mature quality of any person, such as the trait of a religious or nonreligious person, ultra-orthodox or extremely anti-religious or average – you will understand that the trait was formed and became fixed in that person by the said four factors:
The first cause is character, which is the primal matter. A person is born as something out of something, that is, from the parents’ marrow. Therefore, he is to a certain extent like a book copied from a book, that is, almost all the matters that were acquired and achieved by his ancestors are copied into him as well. The difference lies in that [those matters] lie [in him] in a formless state, like sown wheat that can only sprout after it decomposed and shed its earlier form – so is the drop of semen from which a human being is born. It retains nothing of the forms of its ancestors but only dormant potential.
For whatever was attained by a person’s ancestors through understanding turned into mere tendencies that are called instincts or habits so he is not even aware why he acts in a certain way. They are the latent forces that he has inherited from his ancestors. This way, we inherit not only material possessions from our parents but also spiritual possessions and all the attributes that only our ancestors engaged in, generation after generation.
This produces and results in the different tendencies we find among people, such as gullibility, critical thinking, tendency to be content with material life, or being interested in ideas alone while despising and rejecting life, frugality or generosity, fierceness or shyness, and the like. All these images portrayed in people are not their own property which they themselves acquired. It is merely a simple inheritance received from their parents and their parents’ parents. As psychologists know, there is a specific place in the human brain where the things we inherits are located; it is called the medulla oblongata (or subconscious). All those tendencies stem from there.
But since what our ancestors learned from experience turns in us into mere tendencies, they are considered like sown wheat. It shed its former shape and remained bare; only its dormant forces are capable of assuming new forms. In our case, the tendencies are capable of becoming mature qualities. This is therefore considered a primal matter, which is the first, main factor called character, which comprises all the abilities for the special tendencies inherited from the parents that are considered ‘parental inheritance.’
Know that some of these tendencies we spoke of manifest specifically in a negative form, that is, they are the opposite of what was present in one’s ancestors. Hence, they say that whatever is concealed in the father’s heart is openly observed in the child. The reason is that the character stands as if divested of the former shape in order to assume a new shape. It is therefore close to negating the mature qualities of its fathers, like decomposing wheat in the soil, which loses the entire form wheat possesses. Still, this depends on the other three factors, as I have written above.
6. The second cause is an unchanging, direct sequential order that relates to the quality of the trait itself. Meaning: this follows the same reasoning regarding decomposed wheat buried in the soil. The environment the trait is located in, the soil and its minerals, the air and the sun, act on the seeds through a long sequential order, in a slow, gradual process, stage by stage, until it is ripe. The trait then assumes its previous form, that is, the shape of wheat, though modified in quantity and quality. In general, they will not change at all; they will not grow in the form of corn or oats. Instead, they will change individually; in quantity, that is, one stalk of wheat becomes ten or twenty stalks; and in quality, in that they are better or worse than the previous shape of wheat.
In the same way here, man as a ‘character’ is located in an environment, that is, in a social setting. He is of necessity influenced by them, as wheat is by its environs. Disposition is merely raw material; and by constant interaction with the environment and society, he is influenced by them through a gradual, sequential process that follows the order of stages. During that time, the tendencies included in his disposition transform and acquire a mature aspect.
Take for example, someone who has inherited from his ancestors the tendency to be frugal. As he grows, he gradually gathers thoughts and reflections that all bring him to real conclusions that it is good for a person to be frugal. Or he inherited the tendency from his ancestors to be liberal in his opinions. When he grows, he reflects and concludes that it is good for a man to be liberal. But where does he get those sentences and ways of conclusion and deliberation? All this he unknowingly takes from the environment. It is they that influence him with their opinions and reasoning, through a gradual process, in such a way that a person considers them as his own private property, which he acquired through free reflection.
Here, just like with wheat, there is one general, unchanging part that define the character. The tendencies he inherited remain intact in him, as they were in his parents. This is called the second cause.
7. The third cause is a sequential order that the character undergoes and is changed by. Since the inherited tendencies turned in the person by the environment into mature qualities, they act in the directions defined by those qualities.
For example, someone who is frugal by nature, the frugal tendency will evolve in him into a mature trait, and he will understand frugality according to a mental construct. Let us suppose he protects himself by this habit from needing help from others. Thus, he acquired a measuring stick for frugality and is able to be generous when he needs not be afraid of it. Thus, he has changed much for the better from the quality he inherited from his parents.
Similarly, he is sometimes able to completely uproot an evil tendency from within him. This is done by habit that can become second nature. In this regard, humans are more capable than plants. Wheat can change only an individual part, as said above. Man, however, can change by means of environmental cause and effect even the general parts, that is, transform a complete trait, and uproot it to achieve its opposite.
8. The fourth cause is the sequential order that affects the character through things completely foreign to it and acting on it from the outside. Meaning: these are things that are completely unrelated to the character’s stages of growth and will not influence it directly; instead, they act indirectly. For example, financial situations, times of trouble or affluence, and the like, that in themselves have a whole gradual and slow sequence of stages, change man’s qualities by way of cause and effect, either for good or for ill.
I have presented before you four natural factors; every thought and every understanding that appears in us is but their result alone. Even if someone sits to reflect on something for a long time, he would not be able to add or change anything beyond what those four factors give him. Everything he is able to add is in terms of quantity: a greater or smaller understanding. In quality, however, he cannot add anything. These set the character and form of understanding and the outcome in spite of ourselves, without asking us at all. This way, we are completely at the mercy of these four factors, as clay in the hands of the potter.
<big><strong>Freedom of choice</strong></big>
9. But when we examine these four factors, we find that even though our powers are too weak to withstand the primary factor, which is character, we still have the ability and free will to protect ourselves from the other three factors, according to which the character transforms in detail, and sometimes as a whole, that is, by a habit that acquires a second nature, as said above.
This protection means that we can always add something by choosing our environment, which is our colleagues, the books, the teachers, etc. This is like the person who inherited a certain quantity of wheat from his father. He could turn this small measure into great wealth, that is, by choosing an environment for its traits as fertile soil with all the minerals and raw materials that nourish the wheat to a fully abundant amount. It also applies to the effort to improve the conditions in the environment to fit the needs of growth and development. The wise man acts thoughtfully, chooses all the good conditions, and succeeds. The fool takes whatever comes his way so sowing turns into a curse rather than a blessing. Thus, success and profits depend entirely on choosing the environment for wheat. But after placing the wheat in the chosen environment, the quality of wheat is completely determined by the quantity that the environment is capable of producing.
It is the same with our subject: it is true that there is no free will, but [a person] is affected by the four said factors and must think and reflect as they suggest without being able to criticize or change even a hairbreadth. It is like wheat that was already sown in its environment. But there is free will to choose such an environment to begin with, with such books and guides that give good advice. If a person does not do so but is ready to enter whatever area that comes before him and read any books that fall into his hands, he would certainly end up in an evil environment or spend his time on useless books that are more numerous and easier [to read]. This necessarily leads to lowly and bad opinions that cause him to sin and do evil, and he shall certainly be punished. It is not due to evil thoughts and actions, over which he has no choice, but because he has not chosen a good environment. Surely there is a choice, as explained.
Therefore, whoever strives during his lifetime to always choose a better environment is worthy of praise and reward. Here too, this is not due to his good thoughts and actions that must befall him without his choosing but due to his striving to acquire a good environment that brings him to such thoughts and actions.
<b>“I would not dwell anywhere but in a place of Torah”</b><br>10. The former article will help you understand the reply that Rabbi Yossi, son of Kisma, gave a man who asked him to dwell in his town, for which he would pay him thousands upon thousands of gold dinars. Rabbi Yossi answered him: “If you were to give me all the silver, gold, precious stones, and pearls in the world, I would not dwell anywhere but in a place of Torah” (Tractate Avot 6:9). The words seem beyond our understanding. How could he have given up thousands upon thousands of gold dinars for such a minor matter, refusing to dwell in a city where there are no Torah scholars, while he himself was already a person of authority and a great sage who did not need to learn from anyone? This is incomprehensible.
But when you follow the explanation, this is quite simple and worthy of being observed by each of us. It has been explained that even though each of us has an individual disposition, its possibilities manifest only through the environment like wheat that is sown in the soil. The potential of wheat only manifests through its environment, which consists of soil, rain, and sunlight. Rabbi Yossi, son of Kisma, carefully considered that if he left the good area that he had chosen and arrived at a bad and lean area, that is, a city without Torah, not only will his previous knowledge become uncertain, but the forces that are dormant in his disposition, which he had not yet had the time to manifest, will remain unmanifest because they would not have the proper conditions capable of cultivating them. A person’s self-control, for which he deserves either reward or punishment, is related to the environment he chooses.
No wonder that a sage of the level of Rabbi Yossi son of Kisam chose good and forsook evil. He was not tempted by material considerations or possessions, as he concludes there, “Furthermore, when a person passes from this world neither silver, nor gold, nor precious stones, nor pearls accompany him, only Torah and good deeds” (Ibid.). The sages have also advised us to “Assume for yourself a master, acquire for yourself a friend” (Ibid. 1:6). The subject of choice appears in other books, as we know; 
this single act of choosing the environment can benefit or hurt a person. But once the person chooses the environment, he is in their hands “as clay is in the potter’s hand” (Jeremiah 18:6).
Some modern scholars of secular fields of knowledge studied the subject and saw how a person’s mind is but a fruit that grows and emerges out of life’s events in the manner we demonstrated above. They reached the conclusion that the mind does not have even minimal control over the body. It is only life’s events that are impressed on the brain’s physical neurons that control and drive the person. A person’s mind resembles a mirror that reflects the shapes that face it. Even though the mirror reflects those forms, it cannot control or move these shapes at all. The mind is the same; even though the mind contains every aspect of life’s events and sequences and they appear in it, it is nevertheless unable to cause the body to move, that is, to bring it closer to good or distance it from harm. For the spiritual and the material are utterly far from each other, and there is no medium to facilitate the spiritual mind’s ability to act on the physical body, as has been discussed at length.
But for all their sharp wit, this is where their misunderstanding lies. A person’s imagination is useful to the mind no less than the microscope is to the eyes. Without the microscope, we do see pathogens due to their small size. But after seeing the harmful organism through the microscope, we avoid that pathogen. Thus, it is the microscope, not the senses, which mobilizes the person to stay away from harm since the senses do not perceive the pathogen. In that respect, it is obvious that the mind has complete power over the human body to distance it from evil and draw it toward good, that is, whenever the body’s disposition is too weak to recognize what is beneficial or harmful. The body requires no more than the mind’s understanding. Furthermore, when a person recognizes the mind, which is a true conclusion based on life’s experience, he is able to acquire knowledge and understanding from a trusted person and accept it as law, even though his life experience has not had the chance to reveal such knowledge to him; it is like someone seeking a physician’s advice accepts his advice even though he understands nothing by himself. He thus uses other people’s minds and receive help no less than he would from his own mind.
We said as much (see the article The Essence and Purpose of Religion, section 4; Peace, sections 15:16); Providence has two ways to ensure that a person will reach the ultimate good aim. They are the way of suffering and the way of the Torah. The clarity we said is present in the way of the Torah derives from the mental clarity that appeared and is recognized after a great, long chain of events in the lives of prophets and people of renown. A person can fully use them and benefit from them, as if those insights were the result of his own life experience. Thus, you see that this allows a person to dispense with all those bitter experiences that he should have undergone until he develops in himself that clarity of mind. In that case, he can rid himself of suffering as well as save time.
This can be likened to a sick person who does not wish to accept the physician’s advice before he understands himself how the advice could cure him, so he begins to study medicine himself. Yet he might die of his illness before he has time to understand medicine. Such is the way of suffering as opposed to the way of the Torah. Whoever does not believe the lessons that the Torah and the Prophets advise him to accept without understanding them by himself, must learn those lessons only by following the chain of cause and effect through life’s events, which are experiences that are able to accelerate and develop in them the sense of the recognition of evil as explained not by choosing them but out of his effort to acquire a good environment for himself that generates these thoughts and acts.
The subject of a person’s recognition of the state of the environment and the transformation from one stage to another will be explained in the following articles.

Chapter 2

<big><strong>Individual freedom</strong></big>
<b>Individual freedom and the duty to preserve it</b><br>11. We now reach an understanding regarding the precise meaning of individual freedom. This applies only to the first cause, which is disposition, which is every person’s primal matter, that is, the sum of all the tendencies that we inherit from our parents and our parents’ parents. In that regard alone people differ from each other. 
For, as you see, thousands of people share the same environment. The most recent three experiences influence them all equally, yet no two people have the same character since each has a unique disposition. 
This is like the traits of wheat. Even though it is changed by the most recent three causes, it still retains the original shape of wheat and will never assume the shape of a different species. This is the rule: every stage sheds the form of its previous phases; it acquires a new form conditioned by the next three experiences it undergoes and is much changed by them. Nevertheless, it will never lose the general appearance of former stages; a person can never assume the shape of another person who resembles him no more than barley resembles wheat. 
Thus, every disposition has a long formal chain made of all the forms that this disposition comprises, but it is as if it divests itself of those forms, as said above. You can therefore never conceive of two people with the same traits.
12. Know that this is the individual’s true possession that nobody should harm or change, for those tendencies included in personal disposition will mature and transform into intelligent qualities as that person grows and matures. Evolutionary law controls the entire chain and urges it always onward, as explained in the article Peace; every tendency will then evolve and mature immensely. Thus, whoever damages a person’s trait and uproots it from him, causes the world to lose a lofty, wonderful understanding that could emerge at the end of the chain for that trait will never manifest again in anyone else.
From this we need to understand that when a trait turns into an enlightened form, it contains no recognizable difference between good and evil; such distinctions are apparent only when those tendencies or understandings are immature. Not a whiff of them is apparent when they acquire true enlightened forms. This will be explained in future articles.
This teaches us the magnitude of the violence generated by the nations that exert their authority over minorities and abuse their freedom, preventing them from leading their lives according to the traditions they inherited from their ancestors; they are considered like murderers.
Even nonreligious people who do not believe in aim driven Providence can understand the necessity of maintaining individual freedom based on natural systems; for, as we see, all the nations that fell and collapsed throughout the generations did so as a result of the continuous heavy burden they placed on minorities and individuals, who, as a result, rose against them and destroyed them. It is therefore clear to everyone that peace cannot be maintained in the world unless we take individual freedom into consideration, as there would be no lasting peace without it but increasing destruction.
Maintaining all kinds of spiritual forms: we must not abolish any of the spiritual forms that have carved for themselves the right to exist in some corner of the world. Even though there is objection against the more important forms, they nevertheless must not be abolished or destroyed. But a distinction must be made between them: the more important ones must proliferate and the lesser ones decrease. This division must take place in every country. Small groups must not be allowed to disrupt the method. This is the rule; if we understand the prohibition on murder of even lesser people and fools, needless to say this is serious with relation to spiritual forms and ideas, whether they are good or insignificant, that obtained their place in their world. For there is nothing without a place.
Keeping the borders: this is another reason why borders among nations must be kept. Every nation has its own ideas and traditions, both important and insignificant; and the prohibition on murder is equal to them all.
Idolatry ceases only in those who practice it: we are certainly not obligated to force people who entertain this lowly idea if they started to practice it [and now its lowliness is exposed]. On the contrary, when an idea is cast aside by those who practice it, it is a sign that it has lost all its usefulness. For every idea requires time to develop and grow until it is felt to be either good or bad. The advantage of lowly ideas is that tending to them means seeing their lowliness; for understanding evil is important in terms of wisdom as understanding good…
<b>Who is the individual – the ‘I’</b><br>13. We have defined the individual’s essence well with great precision, having deducted what he acquired from society, as explained. But this begs the question where the individual himself actually is? The previous discussion refers to individual autonomy only in terms of private property, which is inherited from past generations. But where is the individual himself, that is, the inheritor and owner of that property that demands to keep it?
From everything that has been explained thus far, we still have not found man’s personal core that will stand before us as an autonomous unit. What do I care about the primal cause, which is a lengthy chain of thousands of people, one following the other, from one generation to the next, with which we have established the individual’s image as a successor? And what are to me the three most recent experiences that are the thousands of people present next to each other in a single generation? Every individual is defined merely as a social automaton, that is, he is passive to two kinds of social influence. From the side of the first cause, he is influenced by a large number of people from past generations that existed one after the other. With regard to the three other causes, he is influenced by the public that coexists with him in the same generation.
This is a universal question, and for that reason many oppose that natural method, even though they acknowledge its veracity. Instead, they choose other metaphysical systems, either dualism or transcendentalism, to imagine some spiritual entity dwelling within the human body that serves as the person’s soul. That soul brings understanding to the body, mobilizes it, and so on; it is the person's essence, his ego.
There may have been something satisfactory in all these interpretations and methods, but the problem is that they give no scientific understanding of how a spiritual object can have any contact with material atoms, that is, with the body, causing it to move. All their wisdom and investigations did not help them find a bridge long enough to traverse this wide gap that lies between the spiritual entity and the physical atom. Science therefore has gained nothing from all these metaphysical systems.
<b>The desire to receive is the created beings’ essence</b><br>14. For scientific progress we only need the wisdom of Kabbalah since all worldly fields of knowledge are included in the wisdom of Kabbalah. We have explained (in Welcoming Face interpretation to the Tree of Life, branch 1), regarding the subject of lights and vessels throughout the spiritual worlds, that the new element in Creation, wherein God created something out of nothing, applies to a single matter alone that is defined by the name “the desire to receive.” No other matter throughout the Creation is considered new because it is not something out of nothing but something out of something, meaning that it flows directly from God’s essence like light flows from the sun, containing no new material, but an outward expansion of what lies in the sun’s essence.
This is not the case with the said “desire to receive” which is entirely new, meaning that before Creation, no such thing had existed throughout reality as God incorporates nothing of the desire to receive; for, as he precedes everything, whom shall he receive from? This is why it is considered that blessed God produced this desire to receive as something out of nothing, completely new. This is not the case with everything else, which is not new and cannot be considered as if it were created. All the vessels, therefore, and all the bodies that derive both from spiritual worlds and from material worlds, are considered spiritual or material matter, which nature is “the desire to receive.”
<b>A person’s sole distinction</b><br>15. We need to further distinguish that the force called “the desire to receive” contains two distinguishable forces, the force of attraction and the force of repulsion. The reason is that every vessel or body is defined by the desire to receive and is therefore limited in its ability to receive both in quantity and quality. All the quantity and quality that are outside its reach are considered against its nature, so it rejects them. Even though “the desire to receive” means the force of attraction alone, it necessarily also becomes the force of repulsion. Understand this well.
Even though the wisdom of Kabbalah does not discuss our material world at all, all worlds are still under the same law, as explained in the article The Essence of the Wisdom of Kabbalah, in the chapter The rule of the root and the branch. It follows that whatever we perceive in any physical entity in our world – that is, whatever exists within this space, be it inanimate, plant, animal, a spiritual object, or a material object – even the tiniest molecule in the essence of that unit that makes it distinct from its surroundings, it is no more than “the desire to receive” mentioned above. This desire is its entire individual form that originates in the newness of Creation that increases it both in terms of quantity and quality, as discussed. This capacity gives it the force of attraction and the (centrifugal) force of repulsion. 
But what it contains beyond the two said forces is considered the abundance that flows from God’s essence. This abundance is identical in all creatures and contains nothing new as it flows as something from something. It cannot be attributed to a specific individual, but as something common to all parts of Creation, large and small, each according to the boundaries of its desire to receive. It is this boundary that defines each individual.
I have clearly stipulated each individual’s self (ego) purely from nature’s point of view. It is completely insulated from analysis in all its needs, even from secular mental and mechanical methods. From now on, we no longer require poor, metaphysically infused methods.
<b>The desire to receive and physical matter</b><br>Surely, it makes no difference whether this force of “the desire to receive” is the fruit of materiality, which produced it by chemical reactions, or materiality is the fruit of this force. For we know the main point: the force of the desire to receive inherent in every creature and atom within its boundaries is the only aspect by which it is separate and distinguished from other elements in its environment. This applies both to a single atom and to the aggregate of atoms that form the body. All the other aspects beyond this force are not attributed to the molecule or the aggregate of molecules that relate to the self but only to the aspect of the whole, which is the abundance that flows over them from the blessed Creator. This is something all the parts of Creation have in common; individual, created bodies do not relate to them, as explained.
<b>Individual freedom</b><br>16. This further elucidates the issue of individual freedom; it is based on the definition included in the initial factor we have called “personal disposition” where all prior forms, a person’s ancestors, stamped their nature, as we have discussed at length. According to the explanation, the purport of the word ‘individual’ lies mainly in the boundaries of the desire to receive that is stamped on the aggregate of molecules he contains.
As you see, all tendencies inherited from his ancestors are merely the boundaries of “the desire to receive,” either its force of attraction or its the force of repulsion that appear before us in the forms of tendencies towards indulgence or miserliness, toward socializing or being a recluse, as said. As such, they are the particular part of a person’s self that acts and fights for its right to exist. Thus, if we destroy an individual person’s tendency, we are amputating an actual limb from his essence. This is considered a true loss to the entire Creation, for there is nothing like it throughout the world, as explained above.

Chapter 3

<big><strong>Maintaining freedom in practice</strong></big>
17. After thoroughly clarifying in theory the right to individual freedom based on natural laws, let us examine how far it can be observed without going against ethics or politics, and mainly how this right can be upheld according to our holy Torah.
<b>Inquiries about the principle “to incline after a multitude”</b><br>The verse says, “to incline after a multitude” (Exodus 23:2), meaning that wherever there is a disagreement between an individual and the community, we are beholden to decide in favor of the wishes of the majority of people. It is clearly expressed that society has the right to expropriate an individual’s freedom.
But we have here another, more serious, question. This law seems to plunge humanity backward rather than move it forward. For while most members of the human race are undeveloped, and the developed ones are always a small minority, if you always decide in favor of the wishes of the unevolved and impatient majority, the result is that the opinions and wishes of the evolved wise people in society that are always in the minority will be neither heard nor counted. You thus condemn humanity to retreat because they cannot advance even a small step forward.
<b>Justifying the principle in social life</b><br>18. According to the explanation in the article Peace (section 5), since Providence commanded us to lead a life of Torah, we are beholden to observe all the laws that concern the upholding of society. If we treat it with even some contempt, nature will take revenge on us and avenge itself as it is known to do, whether we understand the reason for those laws or not. Study there well.
We see that the only arrangement for social life is based on the rule “to incline after a multitude,” which settles any social disagreement or injury. It is the only law that maintains social order. It is therefore considered among Providence’s natural commandments and we must accept it upon us and observe it carefully without considering whether we understand it or not. It is like the other commandments in the Torah that are all the laws of nature and his Providence. They are given and come to us “from above downward.” As you have already heard (in the article The Essence of the Wisdom of Kabbalah, section 8), this world’s natural ways are perceived as persevering only because they originate in and are influenced by the laws and conducts of the upper, spiritual realms.
You will understand by these means that even the commandments in the Torah are simply the laws and conducts fixed in supernal worlds, which are the roots of all natural ways in our world. The Torah’s laws therefore always match natural laws like two drops of water. We have proved that the law of following the majority is the law of Providence and nature. 
Nevertheless, these words have not yet settled our question about the retreat that resulted from this rule.
This is our own concern, but Providence on its side is not afraid of it. It has already enveloped humanity well in two paths, the path of the Torah and the path of suffering, in such a way that it ensures human evolution and the constant progress toward the aim. This raises no concerns, as explained in the article Peace, chapter Exegesis of the Mishna “Everything is placed in pledge” (tractate Avot 3:16). This is a natural and necessary stipulation, as explained.
<b>Justifying the principle with relation to precepts that</b><br>19. We should raise another question. These words apply only to interpersonal relationships, when we accept the principle “to incline after a multitude” (Exodus 23:2), out of the obligation Providence places on us to always ensure our neighbors’ sustenance and happiness, as explained. But the Torah obligated the principle “to incline after a multitude” with relation to matters that concern relationships between a person and God, which have nothing to do with the upkeep of society. In that case, the question remains how this law can be right in accepting the opinions of the majority, who are always the unevolved, and reject and nullify the opinions of evolved people, who are invariably a small minority?
We have proven in the article The Essence of Religion and its Purpose (section 5), that the whole Torah and the commandments were given for the sole reason of refining the people of Israel with them. This is tantamount to developing in us the sense of the recognition of evil. that is inherent in us from birth. [Evil], as a whole, is defined as the self-love (egoism) within us. We thus achieve pure, unadulterated goodness that is defined as love for one another (altruism), which is the sole and unique path to loving God. According to this, even the commandments that concern the relationship between a person and God are considered as special instruments that distance man from self-love (egoism) that harms society. Thus, even the parts relating to commandments that concern the relationship between a person and God also belong to the category that relates to enabling social existence. Thus, they too are part of the framework of “to incline after a multitude.”
This explains the reason Halacha and Aggadah are separated. The rule is that wherever there is a disagreement between an individual and the community, we are obliged to decide in favor of the wishes of the majority of people. This does not apply to matters of Aggadah since matters of Aggadah are beyond all subjects that apply to the upkeep of social life. For they discuss human conduct with relation to interactions between man and God, the specific part that does not affect social sustenance and physical happiness. The majority therefore has no right or justification to cancel the opinion of an individual and every man does whatever is right in his own eyes (v. Deuteronomy 12:8, others). This is not the case with Halacha that relates to the observance of the Torah’s commandments, which all belong to the category of maintaining social existence, wherein order is maintained only by the principle “to incline after a multitude,” as explained.
<b>Individual freedom in physical and spiritual life</b><br>20. From this we arrive at a clear understanding of the principle regarding individual freedom. It is truly a big question: where do the majority of people get the right to rescind an individual’s freedom and deny him the most precious thing in his life, which is freedom? This seems nothing but brute force.
Yet we have explained well that it is nature’s law and Providence’s command: since Providence obligated each of us to lead a social life, each individual is beholden to uphold society’s existence and happiness. This will only be upheld by enforcing the arrangement “to incline after a multitude” in that individual opinion will be neither heard nor counted.
It is thus evident that this consists of the full right and justification of the majority to abrogate the individual’s freedom against his will and enslave him in their hands. Obviously therefore, with regard to all matters unrelated to society’s physical existence, the majority has no permission or justification to steal and rob an individual’s freedom in any way. If they do so, they are thieves and robbers, who prefer brute force over any right and justice in the world. For Providence does not obligate an individual to be enslaved to the majority’s wishes since in the matter of spiritual life the individual has no obligation based on nature to be beholden in anything to society.
On the contrary, nature’s law obligates the majority of people to be compelled by and submit to the individual. This is understood from the explanation in the article Peace (section 13) that Providence uses two paths to saddle and encircle us in order to bring us to the ultimate goal. They are the path of suffering, which brings us this evolution without our knowledge; and the path of Torah and wisdom, which brings us this evolution with our knowledge without any compulsion or suffering. Study there well. And since the most evolved one in the generation is surely an individual, we find that when the majority of people reach the awareness [of the need] to rid themselves of terrible suffering and accept upon themselves the kind of evolution with their knowledge and will, which is the path of the Torah, they are beholden to submit themselves and their physical liberty to the discipline of the individual, and uphold his commands and the special ways he will present to them.
Thus, you see before you that when it comes to spiritual matters, the majority’s right turns into their duty and the principle emerges to incline after the individual, that is, the evolved individual. For it is obvious to anyone that the evolved and enlightened are always an exceedingly small minority within every society. Thus, the entire social success and spiritual happiness are always held and decided in the hands of the minority. Understand that well. For that reason, the majority is beholden to preserve very carefully with eyes wide open all the opinions of individuals so they will not be lost. For they must know for sure, with absolute certainty, that the more evolved and true opinions are never in the hands of the ruling majority but on the contrary in the hands of the weakest, that is, the unseen minority. For every wisdom and preciousness are wont to come into the world in small quantity. We were therefore forewarned to observe all the opinions of the individual due to the limited capacity of the ruling majority to decide among themselves.
<b>The contrast between physical matters and knowledge and understanding</b><br>21. We should further add that reality presents us with an extreme contrast between physical matters and matters concerning knowledge and understanding, which relate to this subject. The subject of social unity that is the source of every happiness and thriving applies specifically only to bodies and corporeal matters among people. Separation among them is the source of every calamity and bad incident.
But when it comes to opinions and understanding, it is diametrically opposed. Unity and lack of analysis is considered the source of all failures that block any kind of progress. And any intellectual stimulation and the achievement of the best results are based specifically on the plethora of disagreements and separation that come out and appear among opinions. The greater the opposition, contradiction, and criticism, the more knowledge and understanding grow; this way matters can become more refined and clearer. Failure and ossification of understanding is the result of only the paucity of criticism and disagreement concerning the matters.
It is thus obvious that the basis of physical success is the degree of social unity, while the basis for the success of education and opinions is the degree of separation and disagreement among them.
It is logical therefore that only when humanity reaches its aim with respect to physical success – that is, by reaching the full extent of love for one another, when all the bodies of people merge into one body and one mind, as said in the article Peace – will the pinnacle of the full desired happiness appear to humanity. On the other hand, we need to be careful not to let the opinions of the members of the human race come too close so that disagreement and criticism among sages and scholars will cease to exist. For the love among bodies naturally brings closeness of opinions. And if disagreement and criticism cease, all progress in opinions and understanding will cease, and the source of knowledge will of course dry up.
<b>Caring for individual freedom</b><br>22. This is the positive proof regarding the immense importance [of the necessity] of caring for individual freedom, with respect to opinions and understanding. For the development of wisdom and knowledge is based on this individual freedom. We are therefore warned to guard it strictly. That [includes] every quality within us, which is called ‘individual,’ that is, the individual person’s personal force, which is called in general ‘the desire to receive,’ as well as all the details of the images that this desire to receive comprises. We have defined them by the name ‘character,’ or the first cause, which meaning incorporates all those tendencies and habits and the like that the individual inherited from his ancestors, who are depicted before us as a long chain of thousands of people that existed at their time and are standing one below the other. Each one is the essential drop from his parents. With this drop, the entire spiritual possession of his parents reached his medulla oblongata (that is called sub conscience).
This way, the individual before us has (in his sub conscience) all thousands of spiritual inheritances from all the individuals present on that chain, who are his parents and ancestors. Therefore, just as each individual’s face is different than the face of another, so are their opinions (based on tractate Berakhot 58a) and no two people in the world have the same opinions, because each has great and lofty possessions bequeathed him by his thousand ancestors. No one else has a fraction of it.
For this reason, this entire possession is considered individual property. Society is warned to keep its logic and spirit to prevent it from becoming indistinct due to its environment. Instead, each individual should maintain his complete inheritance. The opposition and contradiction among them will then remain forever, to assure us always the analysis and the evolution of wisdom, which is the full advantage of humanity, and all its true and eternal desires.
<b>Conclusion: the individual and individual property</b><br>We have reached a certain degree of awareness of a man’s being, which we defined as ‘potential force’ and ‘the desire to receive,’ which is the aspect of the animal’s bare inner core. The extent of every individual body’s original property is also made clear, along with its boundaries. We have defined it as ‘parental inheritance,’ which means the sum of all latent tendencies and instincts which we have inherited into the ‘character,’ which is every person’s primal matter, that is, the parental drop of semen. We have now found the opening to decipher what our sages meant when they said that by receiving the Torah, they became free of the angel of death. Still, we require further understanding about being and parental inheritance.

Chapter 4

<big><strong>Freedom from the Angel of Death</strong></big>
<b>Life - the manifestation of the desire to receive</b><br>23. Understand first that even though this being, which we defined as ‘the force of the desire to receive,’ is the essence of a person’s being. It nevertheless cannot be conceived existing in actual reality for even a single moment.
For that thing, which we call ‘latent force,’ that is, before it manifests, is merely within thought; that is, it can be fixed this way only in thought. But in actuality, no real force can be conceived in the world while it is resting and inactive. For this force exists in reality only to the extent that it is displayed by action.
You cannot claim that a baby possesses much strength when he is unable to lift the weight of even a single pound. But you could say that you know that when that baby grows, he will possess great strength. We anyway say that the force and strength found in a mature person was included in the baby’s limbs and torso when he was little, except that the force was latent and did not manifest in actuality. It is true that it can be decided so in thought since logic obligates it. Yet in the actuality of the baby’s body, undoubtedly there is no powerful force whatever since it does not manifest by the baby’s actions.
Take hunger for example. This force cannot occur in actual reality in a person’s body when the body parts are unable to eat, that is, during satiety. We can say that the force of hunger is present even during satiety, except it is latent in the body. After digestion, it reappears and manifests in the body. Yet this principle belongs [only] to the logical ways of thought; it does not exist in actuality. For during satiety, we clearly feel that the force of hunger is gone and nowhere to be found. This entire force cannot be presented as an object in a resting state that exists in itself; [it can only be presented] from a subjective point of view, that is, when it is active and to the degree that it is active.
In this manner, logical thought has two notions: subject and object, that is, potential and manifestation. The force of hunger, for example, is the subject and the potential, and the imagination of what is eaten is the object and the action. Yet in actuality, in reality, they appear together. Hunger will never appear in a person without the imagination of the eaten food. Thus, they are two halves of a single thing. The force of hunger must be enclothed in the craving of the eaten food since it can only manifest by being enclothed with this craving. Understand well that the subject and the object are displayed here as two halves of the same thing that in essence appear simultaneously or are absent simultaneously.
24. This ‘desire to receive,’ is presented as one’s being. It does not mean that it exists in the person as a desiring and wishing force in a resting state. Instead, it is meant only subjectively, that is, it is enclothed with the imagination of the things it is capable of receiving. It is like the force of hunger that is enclothed in craving the thing that can be eaten; its action manifests by craving the eaten matter, in which it is enclothed. We call this action ‘desire,’ that is, the force of hunger to the degree it appears in the act of imagining.
With regard to the matter at hand, the general desire to receive, which is a person’s essence and being, manifests and exists only by being enclothed in the forms of the things that can be received. It is then established subjectively, but not otherwise. We call this action life, that is, a person’s vitality. It means that the force of ‘the desire to receive’ is enclothed and acts within the things that it wants to receive. The measure to which this action is manifested is the measure of its life, as we spoke of the action we call ‘desire.’
<b>Man and the breath of life within him</b><br>25. The explanation clarifies the verse, “And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul” (Genesis 2:7). We find that two things were formed here, which are the man by himself and the living soul by itself. The verse teaches us that man was first created as dust of the ground, that is, an aggregation of a certain number of molecules, which comprise man’s essence, that is, his ‘desire to receive.’ This force of the desire to receive is present throughout the molecules in existence, as we explained above (section 15) that the four categories of inanimate, plants, animals, and humans, were created and originated from them. In that respect, man has no advantage over the other parts of Creation. This is why the verse states, “dust of the ground.”
Yet it has already been explained that this force called the desire to receive has no reality; it cannot exist without being enclothed by the things it wants to receive and without acting on them. This action is called ‘life.’ According to this, before one attained the human forms of receiving, which are different and greater than those of other creatures, he was considered a dead lifeless person. For his desire to receive had no place where it could be enclothed in to display its actions, which are the manifestations of life, as said.
This is the meaning of, “and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life,” which comprises the forms of receiving appropriate to the human species. The word Neshama (soul) derives from “appraising (<i>shamin</i>) its value for him.” The etymology of the name Neshama is understood from the verse, “and the breath (Neshama) of the Almighty has given me life” (Job 33:4 and see its interpretation by Malbim). Neshama is morphologically a passive verb, like the verb ‘being charged (<i>ne’eshama</i>).’
The lesson of the verse, “and breathed into his nostrils,” is that he brought into his innermost part, “the breath (or: soul) of life,” the Neshama and the valuation of life. It means the sum of all forms that can be received by his ‘desire to receive,’ as said. Then, that force of the desire to receive that was bound in his molecules found room where it could be enclothed and act. They are the forms of receiving he acquired from God. This action is called ‘life,’ as explained above.
This is why the verse concludes with, “and man became a living soul;” meaning that as soon as the desire to receive began to act in accordance with the qualities of those forms of receiving, life appeared in him and he “became a living soul.” But before he attained the forms of receiving, even though the force of the ‘desire to receive’ was inherent in him, he was still considered a lifeless corpse as he did not have room for it to appear and arrive at the manifestation of action, as explained.
<b>The feeling of being</b><br>26. [It has been explained that the desire to receive which we defined as a creature’s essence appears only when it is enclothed in the form it desires, such as images of possessions], food and drink, or merely living and existing without losing its existence. The being itself, which desires these things, is felt too. But to feel within oneself the desire to receive without any form of any image of receiving is of course impossible.
Even though a person’s essence is just the ‘desire to receive,’ it is invariably understood as half the matter since it must be enclothed with the reality that comes its way. It and the image of the possession it imagines are literally a single unit; it otherwise has no right to exist even for a brief moment, as explained.
<b>Life and death</b><br>Thus, while the body’s machine is fully capable, that is, until middle age, the being inherent in a person remains fully intact. For that reason, the person feels in himself a great, powerful measure of the desire to receive, that is, he desires to attain great wealth and much honor and whatever appears before him. The reason is the fulness of his being, which attracts forms of possessions and achievements that it is enclothed with and sustained by.
But after middle age, the declining days begin, which, in content, are the days of dying. For a man does not die in a single moment, just as he does not assume the complete form of life in a single moment. His candle, that is, his being, is slowly extinguished. With it, the images of the possessions he desires to receive gradually disintegrate. He begins to let go of many possessions he dreamed of in his youth. He also gradually relinquishes the great possessions during life’s sunset years. Eventually, in true old age, when the shadow of death already hovers over his entire stature, man lives in the days which he does not take pleasure in. For his desire to receive, his being, is extinguished and only a small imperceptible spark of it remains, that is, when a certain possession is enclothed. Therefore, no desire or hope for any image of receiving exists during these days. As we have proven, the desire to receive together with the image of the object that is depicted before him as being received, are literally the same thing. They manifest revealed, are equal in stature, and have equal longevity.
But there is an important distinction with regard to the manner of renunciation we spoke of during life’s sunset. This renunciation is not the result of satiety, like a person who renounces foodstuffs when he is full, but out of despair. That is, the being, which starts to die during the days of descent, feels his own weakness and death, and therefore becomes more despairing and relinquishes the dreams and hopes of the days of his youth.
Carefully observe the difference between [them]. Renunciation due to satiety, which does not cause any sorrow and cannot be considered partial death, resembles a worker who completed his work. But relinquishing out of despair is full of sorrow and pain and can therefore be called partial death. Understand this well.
<b>Eternal life</b><br>27. Now, after this entire explanation, we are able to fully understand the words of our sages in their interpretation of “‘engraved upon the tablets’ … Do not read it as <i>ḥarut</i> (engraved), but rather <i>ḥerut</i> (freedom) (teaches us it is) freedom from the angel of death.” It has been explained in the articles The Giving of the Torah (section 16) and Mutual Guarantee (section 27) that before the Torah was given, they took it upon themselves to abolish any private property to the degree expressed in the words “a kingdom of priests” (Exodus 19:6); and [accepted] the aim of the entire Creation, that is, to cleave to him in a state of similarity of form – just as he gives and does not receive, so will they be givers but not receivers. This is the ultimate level of cleaving, expressed in the words, “a holy nation” (Ibid.), as said at the end of the article Mutual Guarantee.
I have already brought you to the realization that man’s essence, that is, his being, defined by the desire to receive, is merely half the matter. It can only exist by being clothed in the image of a possession or the hope for a possession. It is then complete and can be called man’s essence, but not otherwise. Thus, the vessel of receiving of the children of Israel who attained utmost cleaving during the sacred event [of the Giving of the Torah], was completely empty of all worldly possessions, and they cleaved to him in a state of similarity of form, which means that they had no desire for their own possessions but to the degree of giving satisfaction so their maker would derive pleasure from them.
And since their desire to receive was enclothed with the image of this possession, it was enclothed in it and merged with it into a single whole essence. In that case, they surely became free of the angel of death. For death is necessarily an absence and the negation of the existence of something. This is possible as long as there is a spark that desires to exist with own possession, [when] it could be said of it that the spark does not exist but is absent and dead. But if the person has no such spark but all the sparks of his essence are enclothed with giving satisfaction to his maker, it is neither absent nor dead! Even when the body is gone, it is gone from the images of receiving for oneself that the desire to receive is enclothed with; it cannot exist otherwise, as said. But when a person reaches the plan regarding Creation, and God has satisfaction in him as his will is done, the man’s essence is enclothed with God’s satisfaction and he attains complete eternity like God. Thus, he attained freedom from the angel of death.

On the Completion of The Zohar

<b>On the Completion of the Zohar</b>
<big><strong>The meaning of cleaving</strong></big>
1. As we know, the expected goal of the work with the Torah and the commandments is to cleave to blessed God, as said, “to hold fast to him” (Deuteronomy 11:12, Ibid. 30:23, Joshua 22:5). We need to understand the meaning of cleaving to God, seeing that thought cannot grasp him at all. The sages have preceded me in discussing this issue, raising the question regarding the verse “to hold fast to him.” How can one hold fast to him, who is a consuming fire? And they answered, by cleaving to his qualities: “Just as he is compassionate and merciful, so too should you be compassionate and merciful…” (tractate Shabbat 133b). This seems difficult. Why did the sages ignore the verse’s literal meaning? It is clearly written, “to hold fast to him.” Had the interpretation been to hold fast to his qualities, it should have been written, “hold fast to his ways.” Why does it say, “to hold fast to him”?
<b>Similarity of form and dissimilarity of form</b><br>2. The reason is that among material objects that take up space, we interpret cleaving as spatial closeness, and we interpret separation as spatial distance. But among spiritual entities that do not take space, cleaving and separation are not perceived as spatial closeness and spatial distance as they do not take any space at all. Instead, we understand similarity of form between two spiritual entities as cleaving; and we understand separation as a dissimilarity of form between two spiritual entities. Just as the axe cuts a material object into two by severing the pieces from each other, so does dissimilarity of form cut the spiritual entity and divides it into two. If their dissimilarity of form is minor, it is said that they are distant from each other to a small extent. If the change of form is substantial, it is said that they are very far from each other. And if they are opposite in form to each other, it is said that they are diametrically opposite.
For example, when two people detest each other, they are said to be separate from each other as the east is far from west. And if they love each other, they are said to be attached to each other as one body. This does not refer to spatial closeness or distance but to similarity of form or dissimilarity of form since people love each other because of the similarity of form between them. The one loves what the other loves and hates what the other hates. Thus, they are attached to each other and love each other. But if dissimilarity of form exists between them, meaning that one of them loves something even though the other hates it, and so on, they hate each other to the extent of this dissimilarity of form, and they are separate and distant from each other. And if they are opposite to each other so that whatever the one loves the other hates, they are said to be far and distant from each other as east is from west.
As you realize, dissimilarity of form acts among spiritual entities as an axe that cuts material objects. Also, the degree of distance and the magnitude of their separation depends on the degree of the dissimilarity of form between them; and the degree of cleaving between them depends on the degree of the similarity of form between them.
<b>Cleaving to his attributes</b><br>3. We now understand how accurate the sages were, when they interpreted the verse, “to hold fast to him” as cleaving to his attributes: “Just as he is compassionate and merciful, so too should you be compassionate and merciful…” They did not ignore the verse’s literal meaning; on the contrary, they based the interpretation of the verse on its absolute literal meaning. Spiritual cleaving can only be imagined as similarity of form. Therefore, when we make our form equal to the form of God’s attributes, we cleave to him.
This is the meaning of “Just as he is compassionate and merciful …” God’s every action is to benefit and give to others rather than for self-benefit since he has no deficit to make whole and also no one from whom to receive. All your actions as well should be for the sake of giving and benefiting others; this way you will make your form similar to the blessed Creator’s attributes. This is spiritual cleaving.
<b>The mind’s similarity of form</b><br>4. This similarity of form has a “mind” aspect and a “heart” aspect. The issue of engagement in the Torah and the commandment for the sake of giving satisfaction to one’s maker is similarity of form in terms of the mind. The Lord does not wonder whether he exists or whether he guides his creatures, nor does he harbor any other doubts. Similarly, one who wishes to attain similarity of form must not consider these matters when it is clear that the Creator does not consider them. For there is no greater dissimilarity of form than that. Therefore, whoever contemplates these matters is in a state of separation from blessed God and will never reach a state of similarity of form.
<b>“And all your deeds should be for the sake of heaven”</b><br>This is what the sages meant when they said, “And all your deeds should be for the sake of heaven” (tractate Avot 2:12) for the sake of cleaving to heaven. You must not do anything that does not pertain to the aim of cleaving, that is, all your deeds should be for the sake of bestowing on and giving to another. Then will you achieve similarity of form with heaven. Just as all the actions of the blessed Creator are to bestow and give to others, so all your actions should be only to bestow and give to others; this is complete cleaving.
Do not raise the argument that it is impossible for a person to perform all his actions for others’ benefit. After all, people must work to support themselves and their family. The answer is that actions performed out of necessity, that is, to receive the little required for survival, must be neither condemned nor praised. It is not considered as doing something for oneself.
<b>How can one transform his nature?</b><br>5. All those who fully understand these issues must be surprised that someone can reach a state of complete similarity of form, wherein all his actions benefit others, while that person’s entire being is the receiving for oneself. From the nature of his creation, he cannot perform even a small action for others’ benefit. When imparting to others, he of necessity expects to receive something of value in return. If he is in doubt about its value, he would not act. How could all his actions be for the sake of giving to others and not at all for his own needs?
<b>The special quality in observing the Torah and the commandments for their own sakes</b><br>I admit that this is very difficult, and that people are powerless to change the way they were created, which is to receive for oneself alone. Needless to say, a person cannot completely transform his nature by receiving nothing for himself but instead acting only in order to give.
For that reason, blessed God gave us the Torah and the commandments that we were commanded to observe only for the sake of giving satisfaction to the Holy One, blessed be He. Were it not for engaging in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake, that is, not for self-benefit, no stratagem in the world could help us transform our nature. From this you would understand the importance of engaging in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake. If a person’s intention while engaging in them is not for the benefit of the Holy One, blessed be He, but for self-benefit, this would fail to transform the nature of the desire to receive; on the contrary, the desire to receive within him will grow much more than what he was naturally born with. I have discussed it in the introduction to the Sulam commentary in the first volume. Read sections 30-31 there. This is not the place to discuss it at length.
<big><strong>Revealing the secrets of the Torah</strong></big>
6. What are the virtues of one who achieved cleaving to blessed God? They are not clearly expressed anywhere, except by subtle hints. However, in order to explain these matters in my article, I must reveal a little, as necessity dictates, and explain these matters with an analogy.
<b>The virtues of one who reached the state of cleaving</b><br>The body and its limbs are one. The entire body transfers thoughts and sensations to each individual body part. For example, if the body as a whole thinks that a certain body part will serve it or give it pleasure, that part immediately recognizes its way of thinking and produces the pleasure it conceived. Also, if a limb thinks it is too confined, the entire body will know its thoughts and sensations and move it to a more comfortable location. But if the limb is cut off from the body, they become two different entities. The body as a whole no longer knows the thoughts of the severed part. And the part no longer knows the thoughts of the body or able to serve or benefit it. If a physician reattaches the part to the body, the body part will again recognize the thoughts and needs of the entire body. And the body as a whole will again recognize what the body part requires.
According to this analogy, we can also understand the virtue of a person who attained cleaving to God. I have already proved in my introduction to the book of the Zohar, section 9 in the first volume (and also in the booklet discussing the Smaller Gathering (Idra Zuta) that I published separately on the occasion of Lag Ba’omer) that the soul is a ray of illumination flowing from God’s essence. This illumination is separated from God in that God enclothed it with the desire to receive. For the plan for Creation to benefit his creatures created in every soul the desire to receive pleasure. And the dissimilarity of form in the desire to receive separated that illumination from God’s essence, making it into a separate part from him. Read the source there, for this is not the place to discuss it at length.
It transpires that every soul was a part of God’s essence before its creation. Yet with Creation, that is, with the nature of the desire to receive pleasure inherent in it, it acquired a dissimilarity of form and was separated from the Creator, who is entirely about giving. For dissimilarity of form separates on the spiritual plane as the axe does on the material one, as explained above. Thus, the soul now completely resembles an amputated limb that is now severed from the body. Even though before the separation the limb and the whole body were one and used to transmit thoughts and sensations to each other; when the limb was amputated, they became two entities. The one does not know the other’s thoughts and needs. This is truer after the soul was enclothed with the body of this world. All communications it had before it separated from its essence were interrupted, and they are now two different entities.
7. The virtue of a person who attained to cleave to him again is now obvious. It means that he attained similarity of form with the Creator imprinted on him by transforming the nature of the desire to receive by means of the Torah and the commandments. It is that desire which separated him from God’s essence. He now transformed it into the desire to give, and all his actions are to benefit and give to others. By making his form identical to that of his maker, he is like a severed limb that was later reattached to the body. It can now again understand the thoughts of the entire body, as it used to before it was severed from it. The soul is the same; after it acquired a state of similarity to the Creator, it again knows his thoughts as it used to before it was separated from him due to the dissimilarity of form of the desire to receive. Then the verse is fulfilled in him, “Know the God of your father”) I Chronicles, 28:9) for he then attains full knowledge, which is divine intelligence, and attains all the mysteries of the Torah, as the Creator’s thoughts are the mysteries of the Torah.
This is what Rabbi Meir meant in his words, “Whoever studies Torah for Torah’s sake merits many things… The Torah’s secrets are revealed to him, and he becomes as an ever-increasing wellspring…” (tractate Avot 6:1). This concurs with what we said that through engaging in the Torah for its own sake, that is, focusing on giving satisfaction to his maker when engaging in the Torah, instead of on any self-benefit, the person is assured to cleave to blessed Creator, which means that he will attain similarity of form in that all his actions will be to benefit others, not for self-benefit at all, just like the Holy One, blessed be He, whose every deed is only to benefit and give to others. By that a person cleaves again to the Creator as the soul had been before it was created. He therefore merits many things and attains the Torah’s secrets, for once he reunites with the Creator, he is aware again of the thoughts of the Holy One, blessed be He like a limb that is reattached to the body. And the thoughts of the Holy One, blessed be He, are called the secrets and interpretations of the Torah. And he becomes an ever-increasing wellspring because the screens that separate him from the Creator are taken down and he again becomes one with the blessed One, as he had been before he was created.
<b>The manifest and the concealed</b><br>8. In truth, the entire Torah – both the manifest part and the concealed – is the thoughts of the Holy One, blessed be He; there is no difference between them. This resembles a man who is drowning in the river, and his friend throws him a rope to save him. Once the drowning man holds on to the rope nearest him, his friend could save him by pulling him out of the river. The Torah is the same, consisting in its entirety of the thoughts of the Holy One, blessed be He. It is like a rope that the Holy One, blessed be He, throws to people to save them and take them out of the Klipot. The end of the rope closest to all people represents the revealed aspect of the Torah, which requires no intention or thought. Moreover, even when an improper thought accompanies the observance of the commandments, it is still acceptable to the Holy One, blessed be He, as said, “A person should always engage in Torah study and performance of the commandments even [if he does] not [do so] for their own sake, as through [engaging in the Torah and the commandments] not for their own sake, one will ultimately come [to engage in them] for their own sake” (tractate Pesaḥim 50b and others).
According to it, the Torah and the commandments are the end of the rope; anyone in the world can hold on to it. If he holds fast to it, that is, if he merits to engage in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake, that is, to give satisfaction to his maker instead of doing so for his own benefit, the Torah and the commandments bring him into a similarity of form with the Holy One, blessed be He. This is the meaning of “to hold fast to him,” as said. He then merits to grasp all the thoughts of the Holy One, blessed be He that are called the mysteries of the Torah and the interpretations of the Torah, which are the rest of the rope. This he attains only after he reaches the state of complete cleaving, as said.
<b>Levels and worlds</b><br>9. The reason we liken the thoughts of the Holy One, blessed be He, that is, the mysteries of the Torah and the interpretations of the Torah, to a rope is that the similarity of form to the blessed Creator contains many gradations. Its section of the rope therefore contains many gradations, that is, levels of attaining the mysteries of the Torah. Attainment of the mysteries of the Torah is measured by the level of the similarity of form to the Holy One, blessed be He. It has five general levels: Nefesh, Ruaḥ, Neshama, Ḥaya, and Yeḥida. Each comprises all of them, and each one contains five individual levels to a total of at least twenty-five levels.
They are also called “worlds,” as the sages have stated that “In the future, the Holy One, blessed be He, will bequeath to each and every righteous person three hundred and ten worlds” (Mishna, Oktzin 3:12). The reason the levels of understanding him are called worlds is that the word ‘world’ has two meanings. One is that everyone born into the world receives the same senses and feelings. Whatever one person sees, hears, and feels; every person sees, hears, and feels. The second is that anyone reaching the “concealed” world cannot know or perceive anything in any other world.
These two definitions apply to understanding as well. The one is that anyone who attained a certain level is able to know and perceive in it all that those who reach that level throughout past and future generations do, so they have the same perception just as they inhabit the same world. The second is that all those that attained that level cannot know or perceive anything on any other level, just as those who were born into this world cannot know anything of those who reside in the world of truth (the next world). The levels are therefore called worlds.
Those who understand can therefore author books and write down their understanding using allusions and analogies that are understood by those who attained the levels that the books discuss and have that understanding in common. But one who has not attained that level sufficiently as did those authors cannot understand their allusions. This is truer for those who have not attained them; they will understand nothing because they do not have perceptions in common.
<b>Complete attainment</b><br>10. As we have already said, complete cleaving and complete attainment is divided into one hundred twenty-five general levels. According to this, we cannot attain all one hundred twenty-five levels before the Messianic era. There are two differences between all generations and the Messianic generation. The first is that only during the Messianic era can one achieve all one hundred twenty-five levels, unlike during all other generations. The second is that throughout the generations, only few exceptional people merited attaining and cleaving, as the sages have commented on the verse, “One man among a thousand I have found” (Ecclesiastes 7:28): “out of a thousand who entered a school… only one emerges who is capable of rendering decisions [pertaining to religious matters]” (Rashi and Kohelet Rabbah on Ecclesiastes 7:28), that is, of cleaving and understanding. But during the Messianic era, everyone can attain cleaving and understanding, as they have said, “for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord” (Isaiah 11:9), “and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them” (Jeremiah 31:34).
The single exception is Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai and his generation, that is, the authors of the Zohar. They fully attained all one hundred twenty-five levels even though they lived prior to the Messianic era. It is said of him and of his disciples, “And a sage is greater than a prophet” (tractate Bava Batra 12a). It is therefore written numerous times in the Zohar that there will be no generation such as that of Rabbi Shimon bar Yoḥai until king Messiah’s generation. His great book made such a strong impression on the world because the mysteries of the Torah in it encompass the stature of all one hundred twenty-five levels. It has been said in the Zohar that the book of the Zohar will only appear at the End of Days, that is, during the Messianic era. For, as we have stated, if the levels of the readers do not completely reach the author’s level, they will not understand his allusions, as they do not share the same understanding. And the level of the authors of the Zohar is the full stature of the one hundred twenty-five levels that cannot be grasped before the Messianic era. Thus, the generations preceding the Messianic era do not share the same understanding with the authors of the Zohar. The Zohar could not have been revealed in the generations preceding the Messiah’s generation.
This is clear proof that our generation has already reached the Messianic era. As we see, all previous interpretations of the book of the Zohar have discussed less than ten percents of the difficult passages in the Zohar. Even the little they did explain is almost as vague as the words of the Zohar itself. In our generation we have merited the Sulam commentary, a complete interpretation on the entire Zohar. Apart from the fact that it does not leave a single unclear word in the Zohar unexplained, the commentary is based on a simple, theoretical logic that any average reader can follow. The revelation of the Zohar in our generation is clear proof that we are already in the Messianic era, at the beginning of the epoch of which it is said, “for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord…”
<b>Time of giving and time of receiving</b><br>11. We need to know that spiritual matters differ from material matters for which giving and receiving occur simultaneously. On the spiritual plane, giving and receiving occur separately. First, something is given by the Lord to the recipient; the giving merely enables the receiver to receive it; but the receiver has not received anything yet. Only when the receiver becomes properly sanctified and purified, does he merit to receive it. Thus, a long time may pass from the time of giving until the time of receiving. According to this, this generation has reached the state proclaimed in the verse “for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord” but only in terms of giving. We have not yet reached the receiving aspect until we are purified and sanctified and study and toil sufficiently. Then will the time of receiving arrive and the verse will be upheld of us, “for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord.”
<b>Redemption and attainment</b><br>As we know, redemption and complete understanding are intertwined. This is exhibited by the fact that whoever is attracted to the mysteries of the Torah is also attracted to the land of Israel. We were therefore assured that “the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord” only at the end of days, that is, at the time of redemption.
Attaining full understanding does not mean we have reached the receiving phase but only the giving phase, which enables us to attain complete understanding. It is similar to the matter of redemption; we have attained it in terms of giving alone. It is a fact that the Holy One, blessed be He, extricated our holy land from foreign powers and returned it to us. Still, we have not received the land as our own possession since the time to receive it has not yet arrived. As we explained, it applies to complete understanding in such a way that he has given it yet we have not yet received it for we still lack economic independence, and political independence is impossible without economic independence. Much more than that, redemption for the body is impossible without redemption for the soul. As long as most of the inhabitants of the land of Israel are captivated by the cultures of foreign nations and are not ready for the Jewish religion and Jewish culture, the bodies are in captivity under foreign powers. From that respect, the land of Israel is still in foreign hands.
And the proof is that no one is excited about redemption as he should be during the time of redemption for which we have waited two thousand years. Not only are the members of the diaspora not moved to join us and benefit from the redemption, but many of those who were redeemed and are already dwelling among us, are yearning to rid themselves of this redemption and return to the diaspora. Even though the Holy One, blessed be He, has taken the land of Israel out of foreign authorities and gave it to us, we have not yet received it. Nor do we enjoy any of it.
But with this giving, the Holy One, blessed be He, gave us the chance for redemption, that is, to be purified and sanctified and accept upon us God’s service through engaging in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake. Then will the Temple be built and we will receive the land as our own, and sense and feel the joy of redemption. But as long as we do not reach it, nothing will change and there will be no difference between the customs of the land now and as they used to be under foreign rule in law, economy, and God’s service; and we have but the opportunity for redemption.
We reach the conclusion that our generation is the generation of the Messianic era; we have therefore merited the redemption of our holy land from foreigners. We have also merited the revelation of the book of the Zohar, which is the beginning of the fulfillment of the verses, “for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord” and “and they shall teach no more every man his neighbor… for they shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them.” Yet we have merited these two only with respect to giving by the Holy One, blessed be He; we have not received anything into our hands, we were merely given the opportunity to begin serving God, to engage in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake. Then shall we merit the great triumph promised to the Messiah’s generation, something that no generation before us has experienced. Then shall we merit the receiving phase of the two: complete understanding and complete redemption.
<big><strong>Cleaving – from theory to practice</strong></big>
12. We have thoroughly explained the sages’ answer to the question how we can cleave to him. They replied that it means cleaving to his attributes. This is correct for two reasons. The first is that spiritual cleaving is not about spatial proximity but similarity of form. The second is that the soul is separated from God’s essence only due to the desire to receive that the blessed Creator imprinted on it. Therefore, after a person removes the desire to receive from it, he regains the initial cleaving to God’s essence.
All this is in theory. In practice, they have not explained anything by interpreting it as cleaving to his attributes. It is tantamount to separating the desire to receive that is inherent in us from the nature of our creation and arriving at the desire to give, which is opposite to our nature. As we have explained, someone drowning in the river must hold on to the rope with all his might. Before he engages in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake in such a way that he will not turn back to folly, he is not considered to be holding on to the rope with all his strength. We thus return to the original question where he would take the energy to labor with all his heart and might just for the sake of giving satisfaction to his maker. For a person cannot make even a single movement without self-benefit just like a machine cannot function without fuel. If there will be no self-benefit but just giving satisfaction to one’s maker, he has no fuel for the work.
<b>Attaining God’s loftiness</b><br>13. The answer is that the abundance bestowed on whoever properly attains God’s loftiness turns into receiving, as said in tractate Kiddushin, 7a that when an important man marries, it is the bride who gives him money, which is considered as if she received it [due to the benefit she acquires], when she is married to him. It is the same with the blessed Lord. When a person attains God’s loftiness, no act of receiving is more important than bestowing satisfaction on one’s maker. This is sufficient fuel for work and labor with one’s whole heart, soul, and being to give satisfaction to the Lord.
But it is clear that as long as he does not properly attain God’s loftiness, giving satisfaction to the Lord is not considered an act of receiving for which he would give his whole heart, soul, and being to the Lord. Thus, when he truly focuses his intention on only giving satisfaction to his maker and not on self-benefit, he will immediately lose all strength to work, remaining as a machine without fuel. For a person cannot move a limb without deriving some self-benefit from it; this is truer for such a huge effort as giving one’s whole soul and being, as the Torah requires of us. Undoubtedly, he cannot accomplish that without deriving any self-benefit from it.
<b>The level of loftiness depends on the environment</b><br>14. In truth, attaining God’s loftiness properly to the point that giving is transformed into receiving, as said with regards to an important man, is not difficult at all. Everyone knows the greatness of the Creator who created everything and sustains everything; who is without beginning or end; whose loftiness is endless and infinite. The difficulty lies in the fact that perception of loftiness does not depend on the individual but on the environment. For example, if a person full of good qualities is not esteemed and respected by the people around him, he will always be low spirited and unable to take pride in his qualities even if he does not doubt their veracity. The opposite is also true; a person who is devoid of virtues but is nonetheless respected by people around him as if he has many good qualities will be filled with pride because perception of importance and loftiness depends solely on the environment.
When a person sees how people in his environment treat God’s service lightly and do not properly appreciate his greatness, that individual cannot overcome the environment; he too cannot achieve God’s loftiness but treats God’s service lightly like they do. And since he does not have the foundation of attaining God’s loftiness, he obviously cannot work to either give satisfaction to his maker or for his own benefit since he has no fuel to enable the labor, and “(If a person says to you:) I have not labored but nevertheless found [success], do not believe him” (v tractate Megillah 6b). His only option is to either work toward self-benefit or not work at all since giving satisfaction to his maker will not be considered true receiving for him.
This will help you understand the verse, “In the multitude of people is the king’s glory” (Proverbs 14:28). It claims that perception of loftiness comes from the environment under two conditions: one depends on the measure of social appreciation. The second depends on the size of the environment. Therefore, “In the multitude of people is the king’s glory.”
<b>“Assume for yourself a master”</b><br>15. Due to the difficulty this presents, the sages have advised us to “Assume for yourself a master, acquire for yourself a friend” (tractate Avot 1:6), meaning that man should choose for himself an important, famous man as his rabbi to help him reach the point of engaging in the Torah and the commandments for the sake of giving satisfaction to his maker.
His rabbi could facilitate it in two ways. The one is that since the rabbi is an important man, the student can give him satisfaction based on the rabbi’s high level, because his giving was transformed into receiving, which is the natural fuel that can help increase acts of giving every single time. After becoming accustomed to the act of giving to his rabbi, he can transform it to engaging in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake before the Holy One, blessed be He, because a habit becomes second nature.
The second way he facilitates it is that similarity of form with the Holy One, blessed be He, is only beneficial if it is permanent, that is, until “the knower of mysteries will testify about him that he will no longer return to his folly” (Maimonides, Laws of Repentance, 2). A state similarity of form with his rabbi is different. Since his rabbi lives in this temporal world, similarity of form with him is beneficial only temporarily for he will later return to his folly. Thus, whenever he achieves similarity of form with his rabbi, he temporarily cleaves to him. By its means, he grasps his rabbi’s knowledge and thoughts, depending on the level of his devotion, as we have explained with regard to the analogy of the amputated limb that is reattached to the body. Study there well. The student therefore can use his rabbi’s attainment of God’s loftiness that transforms giving into receiving and into fuel sufficient for one to give his whole soul and being. The student could then be also able to engage in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake with his whole heart, soul, and being. This is the unique quality that brings eternal cleaving to the Holy One, blessed be He.
16. This will explain the words of the sages that “service of Torah is greater than its study” (tractate Berakhot 7b) as said, “Here is Elisha son of Shafat, who poured water over the hands of Elijah” (II Kings 3:11). It did not say that he studied but that he poured water. This is surprising. How can simple actions be greater than the study of wisdom and knowledge? We derive from those words that serving the rabbi with one’s body and being for the sake of giving satisfaction to his rabbi, brings the person to cleave to his rabbi, that is, to a state of similarity of form. Through it he acquires his rabbi’s knowledge and thoughts by means of a mouth-to-mouth transmission, which is the cleaving of spirit with spirit, thus meriting to attain God’s loftiness to a degree that will transform giving into receiving so he would have enough fuel to give his soul and being until he attains cleaving to the Holy One, blessed be He, as said. Studying Torah with his rabbi is different because it is necessarily for his own benefit and does not bring him to a state of cleaving. It is considered a transmission from mouth to ear; thus, serving allows the student to access his rabbi’s thoughts while studying only his rabbi’s words. The virtue of service surpasses the virtue of study as the importance of his rabbi’s thought surpasses his rabbi’s words and as the mouth-to-mouth transmission surpasses that of mouth to ear.
All this is true when the purpose of serving one’s rabbi is to give him satisfaction. But if the service’s purpose is self-benefit, it cannot bring him to cleave to his rabbi. Then surely studying with his rabbi is better than serving him.
<b>“…acquire for yourself a friend”</b><br>17. As we have discussed with relation to attaining of God’s loftiness, when society does not consider God as it should, it weakens the individual and prevents him from attaining of God’s loftiness. This also applies to one’s rabbi whom society does not value properly. It prevents the student from properly grasping his rabbi’s loftiness. This is why the sages have said, “Assume for yourself a master, acquire for yourself a friend,” meaning that man can form a new social circle for himself to help him realize his rabbi’s loftiness through the love of colleagues who think highly of his rabbi. Influenced by his colleagues’ talk of the rabbi’s high level, each one experiences the feeling of his high level, and giving to the rabbi turns into receiving and into fuel, to the degree that will bring him to also engage in the Torah and the commandments for their own sake. Hence, they spoke of the forty-eight virtues that the Torah is acquired with: serving the sages and companionship with one’s contemporaries; since besides serving one’s rabbi he must also be careful about his friends, that is, he needs the influence his friends exert over him to attain his rabbi’s high level because attaining loftiness is completely dependent on his environment; a single person can never accomplish it, as explained.
Attaining loftiness is achieved under two conditions. The first is to always listen to and fully accept others’ values. The second condition is that the number of people will be large, as said, “In the multitude of people is the king’s glory.”
To accept the first condition, every student much feel himself to be the least of all his companions. Then can he accept the perception of loftiness from them all as a greater cannot receive from one lesser than he, or even be influenced by his words. It is only the lesser that is moved by the appreciation of the greater one. According to the second condition, every student must consider the virtue of any companion highly and hold him dear as if he were the greater person in the generation. Then society will influence him as if it were sufficiently large because structural majority is more important than a numerical majority (v. Mishna, Ohalot 2:1).