Malbim on Numbers
מלבי"ם על במדבר
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Malbim on Numbers



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5

"And Moshe and Aharon fell on their faces": Here it is not mentioned what they said to them, but it is mentioned in [Deuteronomy]....

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10

AND MOSES AND AARON GATHERED THE "KAHAL" BEFORE THE ROCK: Now we will tell how Moses strayed from the word of Hashem...Because Hashem Said to Moses, "gather the Eidah, you and Aaron, your brother," but they gathered the "Kahal." And I have already explained previously that there is a difference between Eidah and Kahal. And Eidah is called when the Elders of the people are standing at the front. This is when they are called and Eidah, when the Sanhedrin, who are the essence, are at the forefront. A Kahal is called when the multitudes of people are gathered in no particular or correct order and the elders are not at the front. And so at the moment when the water came out of the rock at Chorev, which was also a great miracle...it was important that it was done in front of those who were deserving of seeing a great miracle- the Elders. And so too, it applies here, Hashem wanted this miracle to be performed in front of the Elders who were deserving of seeing this miracle, because the people were rebelling against the Elders. The Tanchuma Explains that when Moses saw them approaching, he said, "What is this gathering?" and Aaron answered, "They came to do Chesed because of Miriam's death (to be menachem avelim)." Moses said, "no, this is not a respectful gathering: this is one of chaos and rebellion. A respectful gathering would have its Elders at the head." At the beginning,  it calls them an "Eidah" as the elders were leading, and then they devolved into a "Kahal" who was undeserving of a miracle, Moses and Aaron gathered the wrong group when attempting to perform the miracle. When Moses and Aaron were rebuking them, they said, "Shimu na Homirim! This rock will NOT take out water for you!" IF they had gathered the "Eidah," then water would have been produced immediately. 

Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Verse 1



Verse 2



Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6

<b>This is the command that the Lord has given concerning the daughters of Tzelafchad:</b> This command specifically relates to the issue of the tribe's portion, and therefore, <b>for their benefit, they shall be wives</b> means that even if the husband is not from their own family, <b>but from the family of their father's tribe</b>, if he is from the tribe of Menasheh, even if he is not from their immediate family but from another family within the tribe, they shall be wives.