Bartenura on Mishnah Mikvaot
ברטנורא על משנה מקואות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Bartenura_on_Mishnah_Mikvaot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org
-Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2020
-sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Mikvaot



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

SIX LEVELS OF MIKVAHS: the places where water has entered have six levels, each greater than the prior 
POOLED WATER: a hole in the earth into which non-flowing water enters and which contains less than forty seah, which is the requisite amount for a mikvah
POOLED: derived from "puddled water" (Isiah 30:14)
AN IMPURE PERSON DRANK AND A PURE PERSON DRANK, [he becomes] IMPURE: if an impure person drank from this water first, and afterward a pure person cam and drank from it, the pure person is rendered impure. Since a drop fell from the mouth of the impure person into the puddle, and lest the pure person drinks and becomes impure; for he who drinks impure water renders the Terumah invalid. [----]. And even though he doesn't invalidate the Terumah unless he drinks a revi'it, he does in any case become impure once the drop comes to his mouth and renders impure all the water in his mouth with it. And this droplet is not considered Hashokah (osculation) in that there is not forty se'ah, as taught in the end of our Mishna. But through the contact with the impure, the puddle does does not contract impurity until any of its contents are separated from it. And this is as in the Tosefta 
...FILLED WITH A PURE VESSEL: from the water of the puddle after an impure person has drunk from it. We are concerned that the droplet which contracted has impurified the vessel, as vessels can be rendered impure via contact with impure fluid.
IF HE RINSES, the morsel: It is rendered impure. And if he does not [rinse] then it is pure; insofar as pooled water does not become caused to receive impurity until it has been separated, the halacha is that if he does not rinse then it is pure. And even if he elevates the morsel (of terumah) we do not consider the water than comes along with it to have received impurity from the droplet, because the droplet is nullified by the pure water. But if he does rinse it, we consider and designate the water in his hand as having received impurity from the droplet and the droplet is not nullified by that water rather, on the contrary, [that water] is considered impure and therefore renders the morsel impure

Mishnah 2

FILLED WITH A PURE VESSEL: We learned above that the impurity comes to the water on account of the impure person, and here we learn that the impurity comes account of an (impure) vessel

Mishnah 3

IMPURE WATER FALLS: We learn here that, that of Pooled Water can receive impurity on account of impure fluid which falls into it (the Pooled Water)
RABBI SHIMON SAYS WHETHER HE RINSES OR WHETHER HE DOES NOT RINSE: R' Shimon holds in all cases, whether the impurity comes as a result of a person, whether by a vessel, or whether by fluid, in all cases he holds that whether (afterward) he rinsed to morsel or whether he did not rinse the morsel, the morsel is impure. The reasoning of R' Shimon is [as follows] - I say that the impure droplet of water which fell in from the mouth of the impure person or from the vessel or from the (impure) fluid, (that droplet) will remain on the morsel once all the other water has fallen of of it, and it (the morsel) will be impure. The halacha is not in accordance with R' Shimon.

Mishnah 4

OR IF AN IMPURE PERSON WALKED IN IT AND THEN A PURE PERSON DRANK, HE REMAINS PURE: Because Pooled Water does not become caused to receive impurity until it is separated, as we learned above
AS WITH POOLED WATER, PIT WATER...: They are all equal as relates to all the laws we learn in this Misha, up until the second level (of 6 ma'alot). Pits, that is those made circular. [sichin], long and short....
EXTRACTED [water]...mountaintop rainfall CEASED, and the water strains and trickles from the mountain after the rain ceased falling and ceased creeping on the mountain. The water that remains is Pooled Water, and if an impure person drinks from it, or an impure vessel is filled from it, or impure fluid falls in it, the impure droplet is not nullified in it. But throughout the period during which the rain still creeps [down the] mountain, even though the rainfall already ceased, we do not consider it as Pooled Water, and the rain water which afteward creeps down the mountain nullifies the impure droplet, even though the initial water didn't nullify it.
הקרובים לעיר ולדרך טמאים – for we are concerned lest he drank ritually impure [water] or filled them with a ritually impure utensil.
שיהלכו רוב בני אדם – the caravans that go a distant path. For then they are ritually impure, lest one of them drank ritually impure water or filled up [water] with a ritually impure utensil.

Mishnah 5

מאימתי טהרתן – of those who are near and those who are far away.
משירבו וישטפו (after they have formed the greater part and overflowed) – from when the rains fell and they (i.e., the rain water) formed the greater part over the waters that were already in them before the impure person drank [from them] or that he filled from them in a ritually impure utensil and also were overflowing, passing over the bank of the stagnant waters and they went outside, and the measurement of a overflowing is a little bit.
רבו – not according to the School of Shammai that required both of them, that they formed the greater part and overflowed, but since the rain waters formed the greater part that they came afterwards on the water that were there in them at the time of their ritual defilement, they were purified, een though they didn’t overflow and go outside.
ר' שמעון אומר מששטפו – [from when] the rain waters [overflow] the banks/shore of the stagnant waters/puddle, and went outside, the stagnant waters/puddle is purified.
אע"פ שלא רבו – the rain waters that came afterwards on the waters that were I the stagnant waters/puddle at the time of their ritual defilement.
כשרים לחלה – these stagnant waters/puddles as it is taught in our Mishnah, are kosher/fit to use them for Hallah, to knead and to cook in them Hallah.
וליטול מהן ידים – for everything that requires the ritual washing of the hands.

Mishnah 6

מי תמצית שלא פסקו – the mountains [did not cease] from their flowing, and still they burst forth from the rain water that fell upon them, these nullify the first ritually impure drop that was in the stagnant waters/puddle. Therefore, if a ritually impure person drank and ritually pure person drank, all the while that they (i.e., the flowing) did not cease, [the individual] is ritually pure, for ritually impure water that fell there, was purified, and this is the superiority, for those [mentioned] above, their ritual immersion was not effective for ritually impure waters, whereas here, it was successful. But they are not kosher/fit for the immersion of humans and utensils and hands.

Mishnah 7

טובלים – the entire body of a person.
ומטבילין – the utensils, but the hands at all that require ritual immersion of the hands, and washing them are not enough, as for example for something Holy.
מעין – that its waters bubble/flow a little bit from the drawn water that they pour into it.
שוה למקוה לטהר באשבורן – but not in moving waters (i.e., rivers and springs) but a Mikveh/ritual bath purifies in an a collection of water in one place that does not flow/אשבורן And this is because of the drawn waters that are greater that are in it are equivalent to a Mikveh/ritual bath to purify in a collection of waters in one place but not in moving waters.
ולמעין להטיל בו בכל שהוא – and it does not require forty Seah like a ritual bath/Mikveh, for the Mikveh does not purify with any less than forty Seah and this purifies with a little bit like a spring.

Mishnah 8

מים מוכים – waters that flow that are salty or warm.
שהן מטהרים בזוחלין – for whereas a spring, whose waters are few as above, it doesn’t purify in moving waters but rather in a collection of water.
מים חיים – that flow but are not salty/afflicted.
שהן טבילה לזבים – as it is written concerning it (Leviticus 15:13): “[When one with a discharge becomes purified of his discharge, he shall count off seven days for his purification, wash his clothes,] and bathe his body In fresh water.”
והזייה למצורעים – as it is written regarding them (Leviticus 14:5): “The priest shall order one of the birds slaughtered] over fresh water in an earthen vessel.”
בשרם לקדש בהן מי חטאת – as it is written regarding them (Numbers 19:17): “[Some of the ashes of the fire of purification shall be taken for the impure portion,] and fresh water shall be added to them in a vessel.”

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

הטמא שירד לטבול. ספיקו טמא – that a person establishes his status but he has the presumption of [being in] ritual impurity.

Mishnah 2

בין ברשות היחיד בין ברה"ר טמארות – even though that doubtful ritual impurity in the public domain, its doubt is presumed to be [a status] of ritual purity, this is doubtful ritual purity and not doubtful ritual impurity.
בטומאה חמורה – it is a primary source of ritual impurity that defiles him from the Torah.
טומאה קלה – of the Rabbis.
אכל אוכלים טמאים – he ate one-half of a piece from ritually impure food or drank a quarter [of a LOG] (i.e., the liquid measurement of the displacement of one-and-one-half eggs) of ritually impure liquid, his body is invalidated from consuming Terumah/heave-offering [if he is a Kohen], and all of this is explained in the first chapter of Tractate Shabbat (see Mishnah 4 in the Bartenura commentary in the first of the eighteen decrees).
ואפילו טבל – and now there are two causes for suspicion or doubt; perhaps he did not immerse [in a Mikveh] at all and even if he had immersed [in a Mikveh] perhaps prior to immersion it was lacking [enough water]. Nevertheless, his doubt [regarding his actions leaves him] in a status of being ritually pure.
רבי יוסי מטמא – and even with ritual impurity according to the Rabbis. Because a person is in the presumptive status of being ritually impure.
אבל ספיקו ליטמא ולטמא – as for example, if he at ritually impure [foods] or he didn’t eat, behold his doubt [of status] is to be considered ritually defiled. Or, he certainly ate ritually impure foods, but there is doubt if he made contact with a loaf of heave-offering or didn’t make contact with it, his doubtful status is to cause ritual impurity, that in these, Rabbi Yossi makes him ritually pure, for there is no presumption here of ritual impurity. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

ספק מים שאובים שטיהרו חכמים – In Tractate Tohorot, Chapter “He Who Threw Something Unclean [from Place to Place – chapter 4, Mishnah 7] there it teaches: “These are the doubtful conditions which the Sages declared clean: A doubt concerning drawn water [that falls into] the ritual bath.”
ספק נפלו – three LOG (i.e., a LOG equals the volume of six eggs) of drawn water in a Mikveh missing [its full complement of forty Seah]/
ספק יש בהן ארבעים סאה – that is to say, there is doubt that it were forty Kosher Seah [of water] in the Mikveh/ritual bath prior to the drawn [waters] that fell in, for furthermore, the drawn [waters] do not invalidate it (i.e., since it is lacking the required forty Seah to begin with).
שיש לו במה יתלה – that it has a place to depend upon their falling that they did not cause it to become invalidated.
שאין לו במה יתלה – that whichever way you turn, in which of them that it fell, it invalidates it, therefore, both of them are invalid. But that which we purify here – it is doubtful if is drawn water in the place where he has upon which to depend, that is because the [notion of] drawn [water] is from the Rabbbis. And it is taught in a Baraita in Torat Kohanim (i.e., the Halakhic Midrash of SIfra on the Book of Leviticus: - see Leviticus 11:36): “However, a spring or cistern [in which water is collected shall be pure, but whoever touches a such a carcass in it shall be impure],” that just as a spring is in the hands of Heaven, so also is a ritual bath/Mikveh in the hands of heaven, it is a mere support but not an absolute proof.

Mishnah 4

בתחילה – [at first], there wasn’t any water in the Mikveh/ritual bath at all when a quarter [of a LOG] of drawn water fell into it, and afterwards, its measure was completed with rain water.
על פני המים – after that there was a great deal of kosher water [in the Mikveh, drawn water fell into it].
וחכמים אומרים – and the Halakha is according to the Sages (and see Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 3).

Mishnah 5

של לוג לוג – one LOG in each hole/indentation.
שלא הגיעו לגומא שלישית כשר – for it is like for him a complete Mikveh in which three LOG of drawn water fell into it that did not invalidate it, but here also, in a Mikveh/ritual bath of forty Seah prior to the [drawn] water arriving into the third hole/indentation, the Mikveh was not invalidated.
סמוך למקוה – is like a kosher ritual bath/Mikveh that is adjacent to [water] that is drawn, that this stands/remains in its kosher/fit status and this [other body of water] remains in its invalid status, but here also, the water that is in the holes is like they are considered as standing on their own and not as combined/mixed. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 6

המסנק (if one presses/scrapes up [the mud] against the sides of the pool) – like removing [to the corners] (see Tractate Shabbat, Chapter 20, Mishnah 4) – that he removes the mud to one side. But not that he detached the mud from the water, but rather within the water, he removed it to one side. For if he had removed it (i.e., the mud) from the water, it would be considered like it is drawn [water], and if they pulled from it three LOG, it invalidates the Mikveh. But this is specifically when there aren’t forty Seah in the Mikveh, this is when the three LOG of drawn water invalidates the Mikveh, but if there were forty Seah in it (i.e., the Mikveh), even all the drawn water in the world would not invalidate it.
ור' שמעון מכשיר – because he does not intend for drawing [water] but rather to remove the mud to another place. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.

Mishnah 7

לנגבן – The Aramaic translation of (Genesis 9:13): “the waters began to dry [from the earth],” for they had certainly dried, and specifically to dry them, that we did not intend for them to receive the water, therefore, they (i.e., the water) would not be made “drawn,” as it is written (Leviticus 11:36): “However, a spring or cistern [in which water is collected shall be pure,]” just as a spring does not have the grasp of the hand by a human, even a well/cistern that does not have the grasp of the hand by a human.
אם עונת גשמים היא – that the heavens did not become knotted with clouds and that rain fell.
אם יש בו כמעט מים בבור – we have this reading [of "אם"/if], and we do not have the reading of "או"/or.
ישבר – the jars/cannisters [should be broken] and the water that is in them will fall to the cistern/pit. That this is the conducting of the water through a channel, since that within broken utensils, they (i.e., the water) fall to the cistern/pit.
ואם לאו – that it is not the rainy season, alternatively, that there is no water in the pit/cistern.
לא ישבר – for if it is not the rainy season, he would not be able to make a Mikveh/ritual bath from the water that is in the jars/cannisters alone, for Rabbi Eliezer holds that drawn waters, all of which or most of which were conducted through a channel is invalids. But when it is the rainy season, he would break it to channel these waters, and most of the Mikveh would be filled up from rain water. But when there isn’t any water in it (i.e., the Mikveh) at all, he should not break it, even though it is the rainy season, lest there fall from the water a quarter of a LOG into the pit/cistern prior to breaking it. But Rabbi Eliezer, according to his reasoning, who stated above (see Tractate Mikvaot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 4), that a quarter of a LOG of water ab initio invalidates the Mikveh/ritual bath.
ר' יהושע אומר בין כך ובין כך ישבר – that he (i.e., Rabbi Yehoshua) holds that three LOGS [of drawn water] invalidate the Mikveh/ritual bath whether at the beginning or whether at the end, and not one-quarter of a LOG, and we do not suspect that perhaps three LOGS [of drawn water] will fall into the Mikveh/ritual bath prior to breaking [of the jar/cannister]. But even though it is not the rainy season, he should break it, for it is able to continue until [it reaches] the measurement of the Mikveh, for he holds that drawn [water] that continues throughout, is ritually pure. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.
או יכפה (or turn it upside down) – that he turns the jars/cannisters that are on the roof upside down so that that the water doesn’t fall from inside them [directly] into the cistern/pit, but rather, that they should fall to one side, and from there continue to the pit/cistern.
אבל לא יערה – that if he raised/lifted up the jars/cannister and emptied them, they (i.e., the waters) would become like drawn water, for they have the grasp of the hand of a human.

Mishnah 8

הסייד – an artisan who plasters the pit/cistern with plaster/lime in order that it hold its waters, and his practice was to bring the lime/plaster in a common earthen vessel/pot , and that pit/cistern had kosher water in it but when the common earthen vessel/pot was sunk in the water and became filled up.
אם היו המים צפים על גביו כל שהוא ישבר – so that the water not become drawn, for all the while that they are combined/mixed. But if he would raise the common earthen vessel/pot in his hand, they would stop and would become detached.
ואם לאו – that the waters did not float on top of it.
לא ישבר – and we are speaking of when it is not the rainy season. For if it was the rainy season, since there is water in the pit/cistern, he should break it.
רבי יהושע אומר בין כך ובין כך ישבר – for it is able to continue, as we explained above [in Mishnah 7].

Mishnah 9

המסדר קנקנים בבור ונתמלאו אף על פי שבלע הבור את מימיו – but water that is in the cistern/pit is none other than that which are in the jars/cannisters.
הרי זה ישבר – according to Rabbi Yehoshua that one-quarter [of a LOG of water] invalidates [the Mikveh] and he breaks the jars/canisters and makes a Mikveh at the outset.

Mishnah 10

רבי יהושע אומר בטיט ובמים – when the water floats on top of the mud/plaster/clay and even his feet are sunk in the mud/clay/plaster, they immerse objects, according to Rabbi Yehoshua, because the waters came first. But Rabbi Eliezer does not have this line of thought. But if he would immerse a small utensil in the water that floats on top of the mud/clay/plaster, in this Rabbi Eliezer admits that the immersion was acceptable, since it did not sink in the mud/clay at all and [they] combine to complete forty Seah. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehoshua.
שהקנה יורד מאליו – that it is soft and worn out so much that if they would put in it a reed, it would sink in the mud/clay/plaster on its own.
מקום שאין קנה המדה עומד – the rod/reed that they measure with does not stand on its own with it, and this is not soft and worn out like at first.
משקולת (plummet) – that which refers to builders/masons. And all of these measurements each one adds with the difficulty of the clay/plaster and its thickness, for the first is softer than all of them, and the second is harder than it, and the third is harder than it (i.e., the second), and similarly all of them.
בפי חבית – for its opening is narrow and small. But if the plaster/clay is so soft that it can spill and enter into the narrow mouth of the jar, the immersion has been successful.
שפופרת הנוד (the tube/mouthpiece of the leather bottle) – the tube of the reed that they place upon the mouth of the leather bottle when they pour into it. And the measure of the incision/hole of the tube of the reed that they place on the mouthpiece of the leather bottle, that it would return two mid-range fingers, which is the width of the two first fingers of the palm of the hand, but not the thumb.
הנמדד בלוג – all the time that it so soft that it can be measured by a LOG and this is the utensil that holds six eggs, it is measured with the Mikveh/ritual bath and they immerse in it. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

רבי יוסי אומר. ולזה לוג ומחצה ונתערבו – And behold there are three LOG of drawn water that invalidate the Mikveh, nevertheless, they are kosher/fit.
שלא נקרא עלהים שם פסול – that if they add kosher water (i.e., rainwater, for example) in all of them until the completion of the measurement of the Mikveh, that each one of them was kosher.
ונחלק לשנים – and they added to each one of them kosher water until there is in each one of them according to the measurement of the Mikveh (i.e., forty Seah).
פסול – each one of them.
וחסר אפילו קרטוב – after three contracted/squeezed in LOGS of drawn water fell in it that was missing even a Kartuv (i.e., a small liquid measure equivalent to 1/64th of a LOG) of water.
כשר – [it is kosher/fit] to add upon it water to complete it for the measurement of a Mikveh/ritual bath. It is impossible that with this one that is lacking is not missing a little bit from the three LOGS, and it is found that there weren’t three LOGS of drawn water.
קרטוב – 1/64th of a LOG.
עד שיצא ממנו מלואו – that water that was in it initially when the three LOGS of drawn water fell in.
ועוד –a bit more in order to omit/lessen from the three LOGS [of drawn water]. As for example, a Mikveh which had in it twenty Seah of kosher water and three LOGS of drawn water fell into it and it was filled up afterwards with rain water, it will always be in its status of invalidity/unfitness until he removes from it the twenty Seah that were there initially, and a little bit more, to omit three LOGS [of drawn water].

Mishnah 2

שיעמיד בחצר ארבעים סאה – a kosher Mikveh below from the invalid/unfit one, and he opens a channel to the Kosher one (i.e., Mikveh) so that they can combine and the upper unit/invalid one can be purified from the lower Kosher one (i.e., Mikveh), as we stated, we raise/stretch it (i.e., the partitions – adopting the legal fictions that the partitions around the stand are prolonged). And all the more so, if the kosher [Mikveh] is above and the unfit/invalid one is below, for we state that we stretch and bring the partitions down (i.e., adopt the fiction that the walls are prolonged so as to reach the bottom).
אא"כ פסק – that the waters spotted and went out from it to its fullness and a bit more, as we stated (in Mishnah 1). And there are those who have the reading [at the end of the Mishnah]: "אא"כ פקק"/unless he inserted a stop-gap/stopped it up, meaning to say, unless he closed off on the Mikveh that he had made until it will not make contact/touch any of the water. But the first reading appears to me to be the essential one. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah.

Mishnah 3

האמה נכנסת לו (the water channel enters it) – as for example rain waters that come from the sloping and enter it.
הסוחט את כסותו (a person who wrings out his garment) – and the water that was absorbed by it is considered drawn water, and when he wrings them out into the cistern/pit they come from many places, that from here and from there to the clothing.
והמערה מן הצרצור (if one pouring water out of a cooler throws water out in several places) – an earthenware utensil that they make on its mouth network of lattice-work, and when he empties [water] from it, he pours in water from many places.
ר' עקיבא מכשיר – for he (i.e., Rabbi Akiva) holds that three LOGS of drawn water do not invalidate the Mikveh/ritual bath unless he pours them from one utensil and from one place, what is not the case with garments and a water cooler.
וחכמים פוסלים – for they (i.e., the Sages) hold that three utensils combine.
לא אמרו מטילין אלא מטיל – according to this language, Rabbi Akiva received [the tradition] from his Rabbis/teachers, a utensil that pours three LOGS of water to a Mikveh invalidates the Mikveh/ritual bath.
ולא כך אמרו אלא שנפלו – it does not make a difference whether it is from one utensil or from many utensils. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Akiva.

Mishnah 4

מכלי אחד משנים וכו' – the conclusion of their matter is according to the Rabbis.
תשעה קבין מים – one who experienced a seminal emission (i.e., whether involuntarily, intentionally or during sexual relations, he becomes ritually impure – and must immerse himself in a ritual bath, and after nightfall on the day of his immersion, becomes ritually pure) who is infirm and is not able to immerse [in a Mikveh], if they placed upon him nine KABS (i.e., a KAB = one-sixth of a SEAH, or twenty- four egg bulks) of water, he is ritually pure. And our Mishnah comes to teach us that it doesn’t matter whether one uses one utensil, two utensils or three utensils.
וכן טהור שנפלו על ראשו ועל רובו שלשת לוגין מים שאובין – that invalidate the priest-due/heave-offering, as we stated in the first chapter of [Tractate] Shabbat [13b – and Tractate Zavim, Chapter 5, Mishnah 12]. These three LOGS, from two or three utensils – combine; from four [utensils] they do not combine.
במה דברים אמורים – that from two or three utensils they combine.
בזמן שלא נתכוין לרבות (at the time that he did not intend to add to more [drawn] water) – it is referring to the Mikveh, that he didn’t intend to add to it in order to increase its water.
אפילו קרטוב – a small measurement, one sixth-fourth of a LOG.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

המניח כלים תחת הצנור (one who puts vessels under the spout – which feeds a ritual bath) – a tube/spout (or a movable tube attached to the roof gutters) that rain waters enter through and descend through its mouth to the Mikveh/ritual bath. But here we are speaking of a wooden spout that was established and eventually hollowed out, for when it was established it did not have the law of a utensil upon it when it was detached.
ואחד כלים קטנים – that you should not say that they were not important (see also Tractate Kelim, Chapter 15, Mishnah 1).
אפילו כלי גללים – while they are not considered utensils with regard to ritual impurity, they are considered utensils to invalidate the Mikveh/ritual bath, even if he broke them or emptied them, for it is not similar to leaving jars/cannisters at the top of the roof to dry them out (see Tractate Mikvaot, Chapter 2, Mishnah 7).
ובית הלל מטהרין בשוכח – In the first chapter of Tractate Shabbat in the Gemara (16b), their dispute is established (i.e., between the Schools of Hillel and Shammai) concerning when he left them (i.e., utensils) under the spout at the time when the clouds were gathering and then they dispersed and he forgot them (i.e., the leaving of the utensils under the spout) and then the clouds gathered once again, that the School of Shammai holds that because of the dispersal of the clouds his first intention/thought process was not nullified, for he revealed his intention that he wanted that they (i.e., rain waters) would fall into them. But the School of Hillel holds that his intention/thought process was nullified, for when the clouds dispersed, his attention was diverted, for he held that rain would not fall any longer. But when he left them (i.e., the utensils) underneath the spout at the time of the gathering of the clouds, and the rains were late to come, and he went off to his work and forgot them, everyone holds that since ab initio, it was for this that he intended, his intention/thought process was not nullified through his forgetting. But if he left them (i.e., the utensils) at the time when the clouds dispersed, everyone holds that they are ritually pure, for he did not intend ab initio for this.
בשכח בחצר שהוא טהור – underneath the spout and it was filled from the dripping rain water and fell into the Mikveh/ritual bath. For specifically underneath the spout is where the School of Shammai disagrees, for he reveals his intention that he wanted that [the rain waters] would fall into them, but because of the dispersal [of the clouds], the first thought was not nullified. But if he leaves it in the courtyard [but not under the spout], even at the time when the gathering [of the clouds], it was not proven ab initio that his first pattern of thinking/intention was best, therefore, it (i.e., his thought) was nullified when they (i.e., the clouds) dispersed.
עדיין מחלוקת במקומה עומדת – it did not stand for a vote and the students of the School of Shammai were not greater [than those of the School of Hillel].

Mishnah 2

המניח טבלא תחת הצנור (he who leaves a tray/board underneath the spout) – to conduct the water into the Mikveh/ritual bath.
אם יש לה לבזבז (if it has a vertical rim/edge – by which a flat utensil is made into a vessel-lie receptacle) – a rim around from the four directions in order that it will be for it a receptacle).
פוסלת את המקוה – it would be for them drawn water, and because the spout itself does not invalidate the Mikveh, we are speaking of a spout that was established [first] and at the end, they hollow it/shape it into a receptacle.
זקפה לידוח (if he set it upright to rinse it) – in order that it should be rinsed from the filth that is in it, 
it does not invalidate the Mikveh/ritual bath, for it doesn’t exist in the manner of its reception.

Mishnah 3

החוטט בצנור (if one makes a cavity in a water pipe – for the deposit of pebbles) – it is the manner of a water pipe to be open from two sides, and this does not invalidate the Mikveh/ritual bath unless he hollowed it out a small cavity in order to receive stones that prevent the passage of the water, and it (i.e., the Mishnah) is speaking of when he hallowed it out and at the end established it/made it permanent, for since, it had upon it the status of a utensil when it was detached, for the water passing through it was drawn [water] and invalidates the Mikveh.
ובשל חרס – it is not considered a utensil until it has a receptacle of one-quarter [of a LOG].
לא אמרו רביעית אלא בשברי החרס – specifically with an earthenware utensil after it was broken we require that he broken piece holds one-quarter [of a LOG], but from its outset, even a little bit/anything is considered a utensil, but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
מתחלחלים (thrown about) – [the stones/pebbles] are rolling about within the receptable, and they are not crushed/ground in it even though that it was filled with them, but rather they move about here and there. It is the language of (Esther 4:4) “And the queen was greatly agitated.”
פוסלין את המקוה – for its receiving was not invalidated.
ירד לתוכו – into the receptacle.
עפר ונכבש (dirt and it was pressed tight) – the dirt was settled and made nicely fastened and the water passes over it. The [Aramaic] Targum of (Numbers 20:19): “We will keep to the beaten track,” – we will go up on the paved path.
כשר – for there isn’t a receptacle here.
סילון (pipe/duct/tube) -and a water spout and tube/spout, are one.
שהוא צר מכאן ומכאן – from its two mouths, from the place where the water enters into it and from the place that it does down from it into the Mikveh.
ורחב באמצע – nevertheless, it is not considered for receiving all the while that he didn’t shape the receptacle to receive the stones.

Mishnah 4

מים שאובים – which are invalid for a Mikveh.
ומי גשמים – that are kosher.
שנתערבו בחצר או בעוקה – (that combined in a courtyard or a pit/trough) – in a hole that water gathered in there, or on the steps of the cave, and from there, they continued and descended to the Mikveh.
אם רוב מן הכשר – as for example that twenty-one Seah of them were rain water and nineteen of them were drawn water, it is kosher/fit.
היו מקלחין בתוך המים – that they didn’t descend to the Mikveh by conducting water through a channel through the path of the courtyard and the pit/trough and the ascent of the cave, but rather from the utensils themselves they would splash in an uninterrupted flow into the Mikveh.
ואם לאו פסול – that three LOGS of drawn water invalidate [the Mikveh] when they fell into the Mikveh not by the conducting of water through a channel. But the path of conducting of water through a channel did not invalidate until most of the water is drawn [water], even the drawn waters on their own that did not mix/combine with the kosher [waters], do not invalidate by the conducting of water through a channel other than with a majority. As for example, a Mikveh that has in it twenty-one Seah of rain water, fills with a carrier/porter and channels through it nineteen Seah of drawn waters and it is fit, for the majority are kosher waters. And such is the Halakha.

Mishnah 5

השקת (a grooved stone to receive and carry off the overflow of a well, sink, trough) – a hollowed-out stone that is on the rim of the spring. And the water enters into it through a cavity/hole in its wall, and provide water for the cattle in it.
אין ממלאים ממנה (see also Tractate Parah, Chapter 5, Mishnah 7) – [and they don’t draw from it] water for the waters of purification (which were mixed with the ashes of the red heifer, which was used to purify people and vessels that became ritually impurity with impurity imparted by a corpse).
ואין מקדשין בה – they don’t places the ashes of the heifer on the water that is in it, for it is not considered a utensil. But here, we are speaking of an attached rock that was hollowed out/made into a receptacle, and even something detached that was attached and then ultimately hollowed out/made into a receptacle, since it did not have upon it the designation/status of a utensil while detached, it is not considered a utensil.
ואינה צריכה צמיד פתיל (and it doesn’t require being closely covered with a lid) – if it is in the tent of a dead person (i.e., corpse), it saves what is inside it with a covering alone without being closely covered with a lid, because it is not considered a utensil but rather like a cistern or a subterranean masoned store-room, that saves what is in it with a covering alone.
ואינה פוסלת את המקוה – if rain water fell from inside it to a Mikveh, they are not considered drawn waters to invalidate the Mikveh/ritual bath.
וכמה יהא הנקב – to neutralize it from the law of being a utensil s that it does not invalidate the Mikveh from the reason of drawn [water].
כשפופרת הנאד (like the tube – i.e., mouthpiece – of the leather bottle) – and its measurement is that they would be two fingers of the hand closest to the thumb that return in their width at the extension within the incision.

וכל טהרות של ירושלים נטבלים על גבה – that they immerse within it and make them pure, but there weren’t forty Seah [of water] in the grooved stone/trough [to receive and carry off the overflow] but rather a complete Mikveh was at its side and the waters of the grooved stone/trough mix with it through the incision in the tube/mouthpiece [of the leather bottle].
עד שתפחת רובה – even if there is in the incision like that of a tube of a leather bottle, it always has the status/designation of a utensil upon it until its greater part will be broken down.

Chapter 5



Mishnah 1

מעין שהעבירו על גבי השוקת – which is a utensil, and not the trough/grooved stone that is in the rock.
פסול – to immerse in the water that is within the trough and in the water that leaves and passes from the trough outwards, since all of the waters of the spring spill into the trough. But if the waters of the spring pass on the rim of the trough a bit, even though that some of them pass into the trough, it is kosher/fit to immerse in the waters that are on the rim of the trough or outside of it, for the spring purifies with a miniscule amount.
והפסיקו – for the waters of a pool are not attached to the spring.
הרי הוא כמקוה – but it doesn’t purify with a miniscule amount until there will be there forty Seah.
חזר והמשיכו – that he attached the waters of the spring to the pool.
פסול לזבים – that already stopped up their living [waters]. But regarding those with gonorrhea and lepers and waters of purification [mixed with the ashes of the red heifer for those made impure through contact with a corpse], it is written concerning them [that they require] potable, running spring water (see also Tractate Mikvaot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 8).

Mishnah 2

העבירו על גבי כלים – that the spring passed over walls of the utensils from the outside.
הרי הוא כמו שהיה – to ritually purify with naturally flowing waters (i.e., rivers and springs) and with a miniscule amount.
הרי הוא כמקוה – that requires forty Seah and a collection of water [in one place].
ובלבד שלא יטביל על גבי ספסל – as a decree lest he immerse in utensils. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

שהוא משוך כנדל (which are conducted in channels radiating like the feet of a centipede) – whose waters flow in many places like this moving creature/unclean reptile that has many feet and we call it in the foreign language – centipede.
ריבה עליו (if one added to it) – drawn water until they flowed further and the places where their waters flow there grew in size.
היה – the spring.
עומד – and its waters would not be flowing, and one added to it drawn water and the spring drew until its waters were flowing further and further on account of the drawn waters.
שוה וכו' למעין – these places where the water is flowing/running in them, are equivalent to a spring that ritually purifies in a miniscule amount, and are equivalent to a Mikveh/ritual bath that does not ritually purify other than in a pond/collection of water. Another interpretation: if one added to it and it was made to flow further, that the pools that would direct the water widened from this spring and enlarged them, behold it is like it was, that in the place that its waters flow prior to adding to them and widening them, there one ritually purifies with flowing waters, but from the sides, one does not purify other than in a pool/collection of water, but if the waters were not flowing but rather just standing, and one added to it, that widened the place of their standing, and flowed further, that he had the place of its standing as flowing, it is equivalent to a Mikveh to ritually purify in a pond/collection of water, and it doesn’t purify In flowing waters, for after that in the essence of the place of the spring they are not flowing.

Mishnah 4

הים הגדול כמקוה – The Bible did not call a place a “Mikveh” other than the Great Sea (i.e., the Mediterranean Sea), for it is what Scripture refers to in the account of Creation (Genesis 1:10), for there all the waters of Creation were gathered.
ולא נאמר ימים – in the plural construction,. Other than because many kinds of seas were combined, that all of the streams go to it.
רבי יוסי אומר כל הימים – And the Great Sea (i.e., the Mediterranean Sea) also has the status of a spring on them in regards to the fact that they ritually purify with flowing waters, because the streams travel and flow upon them. But they are invalid regarding the status/Torah of “living waters,” that Scripture calls them a Mikveh. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 5

הזוחלין – as for example rivers that flow/are running waters, behold they are like a spring and ritually purify with running waters with a miniscule amount (see also Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 7, Mishnah 2).
והנוטפים – as for example, rainwater [that drips].
כמקוה – to ritually purify with forty Seah and with a collection of water found in one place [which does not flow].
שהם כשרים – like that which flows, for they drip a little, and even in a place where isn’t sufficient for ritual immersion in flowing waters, unless the dripping completes them.
והנוטפים שעשאן זוחלין (and dripping water which one made into flowing water) – as for example, a Mikveh that broke through its rim and its waters depart and flow.
סומך אפילו מקל – or a reed, either a person (i.e., a man) with gonorrhea or a woman who experiences a flow of menstrual-type blood on three consecutive days during the time of the month when she is not due to experience menstrual bleeding, we rely on the hand or the foot and close up/stop up the place of the waters going out until the waters are standing in one place and become a collection of water, and the ritually defiled individual goes down and immerses [in the Mikveh].
כל דבר שהוא מקבל טומאה – we do not need a man with gonorrhea or a woman who experiences a flow of menstrual-type blood on three consecutive days during the time of the month when she is not due to experience menstrual bleeding whom are ritually impure, for they are not able to close up/stop up the place where the waters are leaving with their hands or with their feet in order to restore the waters and make of them a collection of waters, but rather even a completely pure individual, for he is susceptible to receiving ritual defilement.
אין מזחילין בו – that is to say, we don’t restore with it the place of the flowing waters in order that it will become a collection of waters and he will be able to ritually immerse in it. And the reason of Rabbi Yossi is , that Scripture states (Leviticus 11:36): “[However, a spring or a cistern] in which water is collected shall be clean,” they will become such through purification. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 6

גל שנתלש – from the sea that is moving and in commotion.
ונפל על האדם ועל הכלים טהורים – for non-sacred purposes only, for non-sacred purposes do not require intentionality. But for Second Tithe and/or for Heave Offering, the one who immerses is not ritually pure until he intends it [for this purpose].
טובלין – a man or a woman.
מטבילין – utensils or hands in a place that requires the ritual immersion of hands, such as for something Holy, where it is not sufficient with ritual washing [of the hands].
חריצין (trench) – wide and square like a cave, rather that they are not fountains.
ונעיצים (a wedge-like ditch) – short from the below and wide from above.
פרסת חמור – and the same law applies regarding the tracks of any animal.
המעורבת בבקעה – a hole/indentation that was made in the ground through the tracks of the animal and water was gathered in it and it is combined to the Mikveh of forty Seah through an incision like that of a tube/mouthpiece of the leather bottle, we immerse through it.
חרדלית (rainwater rushing down a slope, torrent) – like a mountain varix. A stream/current/downpour of water that comes from the drawing of water of a mountain, an explanation from the collector of the mountain. And according to the School of Shammai one immerses things in them even if there is only forty Seah in it from their beginning to their end (see also Tractate Eduyot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 2).
ובית הלל אומרים אין מטבילין – until there will be forty Seah in one place. For the rainwater rushing down a slope/a torrent does not ritually purify other than in a collection of water/אשבורן.
שנודר כלים וטובל בהם (dams it with utensils and dips in it) – he makes a division with the utensils in order that they will hinder/impede the path of he water and they won’t be flowing . And he immerses them in water that is within the division of the utensils which are like the waters of a Mikveh.
וכלים שגדר בהן לא הוטבלו (and utensils with which one dammed – they are not deemed to have been immersed) – because all of the utensil was not immersed in the water during the division [of space], other than the side that is towards the torrent/rainwater rushing down the slope) and not at the side towards the outside. But if there is a difficulty, for Rabbi Yossi stated above (Tractate Mikvaot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 5) “anything that is susceptible to receiving ritual impurity – they do not stop the flowing of water therewith,” but how can he disagree with the School of Hillel which agrees that one dams it with utensils/vessels and immerses in it? One can say, that this where they agree is with the concluding clause [of the Mishnah], that stated, “and utensils with which one dammed, they are not deemed to have been immersed.” And this is how it should be read: The School of Shammai agrees with the School of Hillel when one dams with utensils and one immerses in them, utensils/vessels with which one dammed, they are deemed to have not been immersed. But the School of Hillel always holds that one does not dams with utensils/vessels and immerses in them, according to Rabbi Yossi who stated (see above, Mishnah 5), that anything that is susceptible to receiving ritual impurity, they do not stop the flowing of water therewith. And this is implied in the Tosefta [Mikvaot, Chapter 4, Halakha 10].

Chapter 6



Mishnah 1

כל המעורב. חורי המערה – holes that are within the Mikveh/ritual bath. But because most of their immersions are in caves, they call the Mikveh a cave.
כמה שהן – even though they are not they are not perforated like the tube (mouth-piece) of a leather bottle.
עוקת המערה – a hole/indentation that is in the rim/bottom of the cave, its waters are not considered with the waters of the Mikveh that are above them to be kosher/fit to immerse in them, unless there is between them like the tube (mouth-piece) of a leather bottle.
אמר ר' יהודה – Rabi Yehuda does not come to argue but rather to explain.
בזמן שהיא מעמדת את עצמה – when he comes to immerse in the hole/indentation, the hole stands on its own, and the roof that forms a partition/makes a dam between it and the cave does not fall on its own.
אבל אם אינה מעמדת את עצמה – and at the time that the comes to immerse, the roof of the hole/indentation which is at the bottom of the Mikveh falls and the waters of the Mikveh combine with the waters of the hole/indentation.
מטבילין בה כמו שהיא – and even if the incision is not like the tube (mouth-piece) of a leather bottle.

Mishnah 2

והטבילן הרי אלו טהורים – and even if the moth of the bucket is not wide as the tube (mouth-piece) of a leather bottle. As for example, that the bucket itself is ritually impure and requires ritual immersion, for since that immersion occurs to the bucket, it occurs also for what is inside it.
ואם לא טבל – we have this reading. That is to say, if the bucket is ritually pure and he does not immerse it, that it doesn’t require ritual immersion.
עד שיהו מעורבין כשפופרת הנוד – the utensils that are within it (i.e., the bucket) are not ritually pure until the mouth of the bucket is like the tube (mouth-piece) of a leather bottle.

Mishnah 3

בזה עשרים ובזה עשרים – kosher water [in the first two Mikvaot]. But in the third [Mikveh] twenty Seah of drawn water.
וטבלו ונתערבו – through their immersions, the water floated/came to the surface and restored a liquid to cleanness by contact or levelling with a clean well and all three joined with each other.
המקואות טהורים – that that which is drawn water. For behold that the two kosher [Mikvaot] combine together and there is here the measure of a Mikveh of forty kosher Seah, and when the drawn water joins with them, that the waters float on top of them on account of those who are immersing, their waters become fit for immersion.
היה השאוב באמצע – on account of that the drawn water interrupts between the two outer kosher waters, the kosher waters do not mix with each other.
המקואות כמו שהיו – that the kosher waters are kosher to conduct water courses into a common bed/to add to the capacity of the ritual bath to complete the forty kosher Seah [of water], but the drawn water are not kosher to add to the capacity of the ritual bath. But even though that the drawn water combines with all of them, they don’t invalidate from adding to the capacity of the ritual bath, for the manner of the conducting of water through a channel that they combined, and did not fall from the utensil to the kosher waters, but what fell from it to each of them was voided in the majority before they fell into the Mikveh.

Mishnah 4

שהיו בהן שלשה לוגין מים – absorbed and attached to them (i.e., the sponge and/or the bucket), but they are not apparent to the eye, therefore, the Rabbis did not decree that this is not called “that they fell.”

Mishnah 5

השידה והתיבה (the safe/box and the chest) – large utensils made of wood and they are placed within a Kosher mikveh.
אלא אם כן היו נקובים כשפופרת הנוד – it is similar to a cavity/pit that we stated above (see Tractate Mikvaot, Chapter 6, Mishnah 1) that it needs to be perforated like the tube (mouth-piece) of a leather bottle (i.e., stopper of a waterskin).
בכלי גדול – as for example, where the surface is nine handbreadths or more, for its minority is for four handbreadths, it is sufficient with a perforation of four handbreadths. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
שק או קופה (sack or a basket) – a basket made from sprouts/offshoots of a peeled willows.
מטבילין בהן כמו שהן – if they are in the ocean. But they don’t require a perforation like the tube (mouthpiece) of a leather bottle (i.e., stopper of a waterskin), for all of them are filled with holes and the water in them is voided as regards the water of the Mikveh.
אינן פוסלין את המקוה – because of drawn water.
ומעלין אותן כדרכן (and bring them out in the ordinary way) – as for example, in a Mikveh that has in it forty Seah defined exactly as we state further on (see Tractate Mikvaot, Chapter 7, Mishnah 6) regarding a cushion or mattress of leather, since he lifted up their rims/lips from the water, the water within them is [considered] drawn [water]. How should he do it? Immerse them and raise them through their rims at the bottom of the vessel, for we are not concerned about a sack or a basket, for the water that is within them is not considered drawn water to invalidate the Mikveh.

Mishnah 6



Mishnah 7

עירוב מקואות – a Mikveh that is lacking [a certain amount of kosher water] that is at the side of a complete (i.e., full) Mikveh. Or alternatively, in this one (i.e, Mikveh) are twenty Seah and in that one are twenty Seah and the water intermingles through an incision or a perforation, its measure to combine them and to make them fit/kosher is as if each one has forty Seah.
כשפופרת הנוד כעוביה וכחללה (like the mouth-piece of a leather bottle in its thickness and its empty space/capacity) – of a reed that they place in the mouth of the tube. And that is like two fingers that return to their place, turning themselves around in the space in the cavity of the incision. And the two fingers that they mentioned are the two fingers adjacent to the thumb, the first ones that are in the palm of the hand, and that is a finger (i.e., index finger) and a cubit (i.e., middle finger -used to measure the cubit from the person’s elbow).

מפני שהיא מן התורה – the obligation of immersion in a Mikveh of water (see Genesis 1:10). It is from the Torah.
וכן כזית מן המת – there is doubt if they have according to the measurement and doubt if they don’t have according to the measurement, their doubtfulness makes it impure. And especially in the private domain, but in the public domain, their doubtfulness makes it pure. But even though that even according to the rabbis a doubtful of [ritual] impurity in the private domain, its doubt [makes it] impure, nevertheless, here, if these were the measurements of the Rabbis, we would purify it.
כל שיעמוד – whether dust whether stones whether red insects found in liquids (i.e., gnats) that grow in the water, if they stand on the mouth of the incision, it diminishes the mouthpiece of the leather bottle, and the Mikvaot/ritual baths do not mix/combine.
כל שהוא מבריית המים – as for example red insects found in liquids (i.e., gnats). But the Halakha is not according to Rabban Shimon ben Gamaliel.

Mishnah 8

העליון מן התחתון – as for example, that the upper [Mikveh] had drawn water and the bottom [Mikveh] had kosher/fit water.
והרחוק מן הקרוב – but we ae not concerned lest a person come and he stopped/interrupted the contact between liquids [so that the water of the ritual bath comes in contact with the impure water], and has immersion did not have any effect for him.
מביא סילון של חרס או של אבר (brings a pipe of earthenware or lead) – and the same law applies of wood or of bone or of glass. אבר – lead.
ומניח ידו תחתיו – of the pipe in order that the water does not go outside when he fills it until the time when the waters come in contact and combine with the other [pure] Mikveh.
אפילו כשערה – and they (i.e., the Rabbis) were lenient regarding drawn water which is Rabbinical. But if the upper [Mikveh] was lacking from its measure and he comes to make it fit through contact with the waters [of the lower Mikveh] to complete it to its appropriate measure, it is not enough with contact as much as a hair’s breadth, for even Rabbi Yehuda who is more lenient in the second chapter of [Tractate] Gittin [16a] as he requires moist enough to moisten other objects.
ממלא בכתף – that since after there are forty Seah of fit/kosher water in the Mikveh, even all of the drawn water in the world does not invalidate it.

Mishnah 9

לשתי – from above to below.
לערב – from right to left.
חלוף הדברים – from above to below, it doesn’t combine, from right to left, it does combine. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
נפרצו זה בתוך זה – that is from above at the top of the wall. And specifically when the wall is split/chipped off or perforated but above at its top it is whole, is where we require like the mouth-piece of the leather bottle, but when the wall is broken through at its top and the waters combine there, it is sufficient like the thickness of a garlic peel or like the width of the mouth-piece of a leather bottle.

Mishnah 10

האביק שבמרחץ (a pot in the bath-tub to which a waste-pipe is attached) – a sunken metal utensil in the bath-tub/bathing reservoir and it has in it a perforation/hole, that when the waters of the bath-tub/bathing reservoir become detestable on account of the immersions, they open the incision/hole that is in the pot and the water that is in the bath-tub/bathing reservoir goes out ,and channels to it other clean water and they stop up the hole so that the waters won’t go out, and the waters are channeled/flow into the bath-tub/bathing reservoir are kosher/fit for ritual immersion, for after they washed in warm waters, they enter into the bathing reservoir and immerse there.
בזמן שהוא באמצע פסול – because all the dragged along waters are upon it, and there aren’t drawn waters here but rather what is within it. But the rest of the waters are a kosher/fit Mikveh adjacent to the drawn waters, 
but drawn waters at the side of kosher/fit waters do not invalidate, and even though they come in contact one with the other.
אם מקבלת האמבטי רביעית – kosher/fit waters prior to their reaching the pot in the bath-tub to which the waste pipe is attached, it is as if it received forty Seah, for the one-quarter of a LOG measurement of Mikveh is according to the Torah to immerse in it needles and water pipes/ducts.
אם מקבל האביק – meaning to say, that since the pot in the bath-tub to which a waste-pipe is attached is made to receive anything, it is ritually impure in any matter that will be, whether in the middle or whether from the side, whether the bath-tub receives a quarter-Log prior to it coming to the pot in the bath-tube to which a waste-pipe is attached or whether it doesn’t receive anything.

Mishnah 11

המטהרת שבמרחץ (the water pipe/filter of a bath/gutter) – the troughs/gutters (i.e., grooved stones to receive and carry off the overflow of a well/sink) that are made in a bath that channel to them cold water to rinse them off in order to purify themselves after they washed in hot water, and sometimes they are two troughs one on the side of the other, that the one is higher than its neighbor. And there is a hole in the wall that is between both of them that water goes out from this one to that one.
אם יש כנגד הנקב שלשה לוגין – that the hole/perforation is wide and long like the measurement that three LOGS will enter into it, the upper [Mikveh] is invalidated on account of the drawn water that is in the lower one, for it is considered as if the water that corresponds the cavity of the hole are drawn in the middle of the upper [Mikveh], not from the side, and three LOG of drawn water invalidate when they are in the middle, even though they do not invalidate from the side. And the remarkable thing is what it (i.e., the Tanna/teacher of our Mishnah) took that the bottom one is drawn water, and the upper one is fit/kosher water, for it is the manner of water to descend and it is not the manner of water to ascend, but nevertheless, the upper [Mikveh] is invalidated. And all the more so, that it (i.e., the Mikveh) is invalidated when the kosher/fit is to side of the lower one.
כמה יהא בנקב – now it comes to teach us what is the measurement of the hole/incision that three LOG [of water[ came out from it at one time.
אחד משלש מאות ועשרים בבריכה – that three LOG are 1/320th [it needs to say from forty Seah]. How so? The Seah is six KAB, and the KAB is four LOG, it is found that forty SEAH are nine hundred and sixty LOG. Thus three LOG are 1/320th part of a pool, meaning to say, that in a kosher Mikveh of forty Seah, and the Sages estimated the measurement of a Mikveh that holds forty Seah, a cubit by a cubit at the height of three cubits, for the measurement of the hole/incision that holds three LOG is 1/320th from a cubit by a cubit at the height of three cubits that hold forty Seah. And Maimonides wrote, that if the pool was less or more than forty Sea, we calculate the hole/incision at less or more according to this calculation, as for example, if the pool had twenty Seah [of water], the hole must be 1/160th in size.
אפילו התחתון מלאה כשרים והעליונה מלאה שאובין – that it is the manner of water to descend, nevertheless, three LOGS of drawn water that are in the hole do not invalidate the lower [Mikveh].
שלא אמרו אלא שלשה לוגין שנפלו – for the drawn water does not invalidate the Mikveh until it falls itno it. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Chapter 7



Mishnah 1

יש מעלין – complete/raise it to forty Seah.
ולא פוסלין – with three LOG of drawn [water] and in all of them it explains how.
הכפור (hoar-frost) – rain that falls curdled.
גליד (ice-coating on the water) – water that froze on the face of the ground or on the face of the water.
טיט הנרוק (soft, miry clay – in the bath reservoir) – soft and spitting plaster that is made like spittle.
אבן הברד כמים (hailstones like [drawn] water) – like drawn water as we say later on (see the next Mishnah) invalidates [the Mikveh] but does not raise it. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri, but the Halakha is according to the testimony of the people of Medva who make a Mikveh from the snow even ab initio.
נמצאו מעלין – that they complete/raise it.
ולא פוסלין – with three LOGS of drawn [water], for a Seah is much more than three LOGS and the Mikveh is not invalidated through this.

Mishnah 2

המים – drawn [water] whether impure or pure.
מי כבשים (water in which food has been pressed) – water that they pressed in them olives or kinds of vegetables.
מי שלקות (water in which food has been seethed) – water in which they seethed/boiled thoroughly to a pulp vegetables.
והתמד (husks and stalks of pressed grapes, steeped in water -used as inferior wine or as vinegar) – shells of grapes/pomace of kernels and pomace of grapes (i.e., the interior) or lees/sediment that one placed water upon them.
עד שלא החמיץ – that if it fermented, it is judged like fruit juice.
קורטוב – one sixty-fourth of a LOG.
פעמים מעלין – as we explain, when there in a Mikveh/ritual bath of forty Seah of kosher/fit water and he placed in a Seah of fruit juice and afterwards took a Seah of water from it and fruit juice mixed/combined together, behold the Seah of fruit juice that remained in the Mikveh completes/fills the Mikveh.
פעמים אין מעלין – as it is taught – regarding a Mikveh that has forty Seah minus/less one [Seah].

Mishnah 3

ושינו את מראיו כשר – that the rinsing of utensils is not considered a change in appearance (i.e., color).
ואין פוסלים אותו בשינוי מראה – because color does not have substance in it.
ומוחל (thin secretion)– water that comes forth from olives.
ימתין עד שירדו גשמים – that to fill it [by drawing water in buckets] with one’s shoulder is impossible, for we are dealing with that which is lacking, and it would be invalidated with three LOGS [of drawn water].
ממלא בכתף – for a complete/filled Mikveh, the drawn [waters] do not invalidate it (i.e., the Mikveh) ever.

Mishnah 4

אין בו מראה מים ארבעים סאה – if there aren’t in the Mikveh forty Seah that have the appearance/color of water, he should not ritually immerse in that Mikveh even on that side that has in it the appearance/color of water, but if he ritually immersed, his immersion has no effect.

Mishnah 5

ונפלו למקוה לא פסלוהו – for since they appear like wine, and fruit juice does not invalidate [the Mikveh] with three LOG.
כל הולך אחר המראה – even though the milk does not invalidate the Mikveh and there isn’t in the water a measure of three LOG to invalidate, nevertheless since there are here three LOG that appear like water, we consider them as if they are all water and they invalidate. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

Mishnah 6

והשני טמא – for certainly there is a lack in the measurement of the Mikveh through the ritual immersion of the first [person].
אף השני טהור – for we say that we lower [the partition], for it is as if the water that the first person brought up on his body is attached to the waters of the Mikveh, and it (i.e., the Mikveh) is not lacking anything from its measurement. And they explained in the Gemara (i.e., Talmud) of [Tractate] Hagigah [19a] that Rabbi Yehuda did not purify other than according to the gradations of the Rabbis, as for example that he was ritually pure for non-sacred things and he immersed in order to become ritually pure for tithes, or that he was ritually pure for tithes and he immersed in order to become pure for priest’s due/heave offerings. But to ascend from complete ritual impurity to purity, he is ritually impure to everyone. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
סגוס (coarse woolen blanket – usually as a mattress to sleep on) – a thick woolen clothing, and we call it in Arabic ALBORNOS, and it absorbs a lot of water.
מקצתו נוגע במים טהור – and we are speaking of a Mikveh that has in it exactly forty Seah [of water] and another person immersed after he immersed in it the thick woolen cloth, the person who immersed is ritually pure even though that it is lacking the measurement of the Mikveh with the immersion of the thick woolen cloth, for since part of the thick woolen cloth touches the water. And Rabbi Yehuda is the one who holds that we state that גוד אחית/we lower the partition (i.e., it is as if the water on the thick woolen cloth was still in the water).
המים שבתוכו שאובים – and we return and invalidate the Mikveh with the three LOG [of drawn water] for there were only exactly forty Seah [of fit/kosher water] in it and it became lacking when he lifted their lips out of the water.
ומעלה אותם דרך שוליהם – in order that the water that is within them doesn’t fall to the Mikveh and will invalidate all of its waters.

Mishnah 7

הטביל בו את המטה – whose legs are high, and it is impossible to ritually immerse all of it as one in a small Mikveh like this whose measurements are exact, unless its legs sink down in the [thick] mud.
העבה – that is not miry (see Mishnah 1 of this chapter), and we don’t ritually immerse in it.
שהמים מקדמין – to ritually immerse the legs prior to its sinking in the mud, and it was [ritually] immersed in water.
שמימיו מרודדים – that the waters are not deep, on account that the Mikveh is wide and the waters spread out throughout all of it, and even though it has forty Seah one’s whole body is not covered with water all at once.
כובש (presses down) – to one side of the Mikveh.
אפילו חבילי עצים וקנים – and even though it appears like a Mikveh that they divided, nevertheless since the water enters between them, it is not a division. And the word וכובש"”/he presses that it (i.e., the Mishnah) uses, because the wood and the reeds float over the face of the water and heneeds to press upon them stones in order that they will enter underneath the water.
היה מוליך ומביא במים – he shakes/stirs the water with his hand.
כיון שעבר הגל – [the wave] of water over the top of the Mikveh that the needle is placed in it and the waters of the wave have floated over the needle, it is [ritually] pure. And because the needle is thin and small, and he fears lest it will fall into the water, this is the manner of [ritually] immersing it.

Chapter 8



Mishnah 1

ארץ ישראל טהורה – and even the villages of the Cutheans (i.e., Samaritans) upon whom they (i.e., the Rabbis) did not decree [ritual] impurity, other than the lands of the nations outside of the Land [of Israel].
ומקואותיה טהוהים – and we don’t presume them to be of drawn [water], for undefined they were made kosher/fit.
לבעלי קריין – to permit them by the words of the Torah, for a person who experienced a seminal emission is prohibited by the words of the Torah until he [ritually] immerses, and if he [ritually] immerses in a place where all of its waters are drawn, it is permitted.
אפילו נתמלאו בקילון (even if they were filled up with a swipe and bucket for drawing water – see also Tractate Moed Katan, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1) – that they filled water with a shoulder and poured it into a hole and from that hole/indentation there is a path that the water travels to the Mikveh.
שחוץ למפתח – outside of the opening of the town gate.
כשרים אף לנדות – to permit them to their husbands, and even though there is the prohibition of extirpation [for not following the laws of the menstruant woman properly]. But we are not concerned lest they (i.e., the Mikvaot/ritual baths) were lacking [enough water] and that drawn water fell upon them and they were filled up, for outside of the town gate, the foot of people are not found there.
לפנים מן הפחת – inside from the entrance to the town gate.
ופסולים לכל הטמאים – for many people are found there and fill up water with their shoulders and give them there [clothing] to launder and to wash.
מפני הכביסה – that one can say that they (i.e., the Mikvaot/ritual baths) were lacking [in water] and were made invalid from the utensils that they would launder there.
הרחוקים טהורים – for they don’t launder in them but one shouldn’t be concerned for this. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 2

חלוקים – that he drips [urine] in smooth drops like a chain.
בתחילה – at the beginning of his urinating.
טהור – for it is not a kind of emission, but rather, from the stopping of urination it comes.
באמצע ובסוף – [in the middle or at the end] of his urination, he is impure, that he is someone with a kind of emission.
נמשכים (prolonged/continued or conducted in a channel) – urination that is attached.
טמא – for it is a kind of emission.
לבנים כעכורים – and at the beginning heis pure, but in the middle and at the end he is [ritually] impure. But the Halakah is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 3

המהרהר בלילה – and he sees [in his dream] that he is coming upon (i.e., having sex with) a woman (see Talmud Niddah 43a) and when he wakes up from his sleep, he found that his flesh (i.e., his member) is hot and he didn’t find a drop of an emission.
טמא – certainly he saw an emission but it was lost in its minuteness in the clothing.
הפולטת שכבת זרע ביום השלישי טהורה – as for example, that he had sex with her on Wednesday [night] and Friday [night] and she discharged [semen] on Shabbat, it doesn’t make a difference that he had engaged in sex with her at the beginning of Thursday night, that the semen remained in her womb four complete periods: Wednesday night, Thursday, Thursday night and Friday, nor whether he had intercourse with her on Thursday at darkness, and it did not remain in her other than part of Thursday and Thursday night and Friday, for there are only two complete periods, for the period is either the day or the night.
ר' ישמעאל – comes to dispute and to say that she discharges [semen] on the third day [following] her intercourse, she is [ritually] impure, but if she discharges on the fourth, she is [ritually] pure. However, he admits that part of a day is considered as a complete day, for the Torah was not stringent other than in the number of days but not in the number of periods.
ופעמים שהן ארבע עונות שלימות – as for example if he had sex with her on the night of [Thursday] at dark, her emission makes her [ritually] impure until the beginning of Friday night.
ופעמים שהם חמש עונות – as for example, if he engaged in sex with her at the beginning of Wednesday at dawn, and her discharge [ of semen] is [ritually] impure until Friday night.
ופעמים שהם שש – as for example, he engaged in sex with her at the beginning of Tuesday evening, and she is [ritually] impure until the beginning of Friday night, it was found to be six complete periods.
ר' עקיבא אומר לעולם חמש – [five] periods, and if it part of it came out in the first period, we give her part of the sixth period to complete the five periods, for every [woman] discharges [semen] within five complete periods is [ritually] impure. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eleazar ben Azariah.

Mishnah 4

טמאה – the drop of effusion of semen that she discharged.
טהורה – and there isn’t even the [ritual] impurity of the Rabbis.
ולא כבדה את הבית – did not wipe out/cleanse herself until there would not remain the moistness of the effusion of semen.
כאילו לא טבלה – for we are concerned lest she emit a drop of semen that remained in her in that place.
לכשיטיל מים טמא (when he does urinate he is unclean) – lest there remain from the emission within the member and he goes out with the urination.
בילד ובבריא טהור – that it comes out with power and does not remain. And until when is he called a child? All the while that he stands on one foot and removes his shoe and puts on his shoe, and even at age eighty. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 5

טהורה מטומאתה – from the defilement of being a menstruant woman, and she is permitted to [have sexual relations with] her husband.
אבל טמאה על גב רוקה – as a result of the coins prior to the [ritual] immersion. And she is impure from the law of contact, for her spittle defiles through contact and carrying.
נתנה שערה בפיה – and the water did not come on to her hair.
קרצה שפתותיה (if – in taking a ritual immersion – she pressed her lips together) – she pushed her lips greatly this one on that that one.
כאילו לא טבלה – and is forbidden to her husband as she was.
האוחז באדם ובכלים ומטבילן טמאין – for in the place of his holding [them], the water did not come.
ואם הדיח ידיו במים טהורים – since the liquid that is on his hands combines to the waters of the Mikveh and further there is no interposition/an intervening object.
ר' שמעון אומר ירפה (he should loosen his hold on the objects – so that water can come in contact with them) – But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Shimon.
בית הסתרים (the covered parts of the body/posteriors) – as for example, within the ear and within the nose and within the mouth.
בית הקמטין (parts of the body which have folds) – of the arm-pit and of the nakedness [of the person immersing]. Alternatively, the folds of an old man and an old woman whose flesh is folded/wrinkled.
אין צריך שיבואו בהן מים – as it is written (Leviticus 15:11): “If one with a discharge, without having rinsed his hands in water [touches another person, that person shall wash his clothes, bathe in water, and remain impure until morning],” for with rinsing of his hands the person with gonorrhea is [ritually] purified, but isn’t immersion of all of the boy in living waters is what he needs, but rather to inform you, just as his hands are as it appears, also all of his body is as it appears, except for the covered parts of the body. But nevertheless, the Sages say that a person should always accustom in his home that woman rinses her folds hat the time of her ritual immersion, assuming that the water doesn’t have to come upon them, [but] the place that is appropriate for water to come upon it, we require it.

Chapter 9



Mishnah 1

אלו חוצצין. חוטי צמר וחוטי פשתן והרצועות – and the daughters plait the hair that is on their head, and they are fastened in the hair that is in the head and they prevent the water from entering the hair.
של צמר ושל שער אין חוצצים – but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda regarding wool, but threads of hair, the Sages agree with him, because the water enters in them, and especially the threads that are in the head interpose, but that of the neck do not interpose, for the woman does not chock herself.

Mishnah 2

קלקי הלב (matted hair on the chest) – hair that is on the chest corresponding to the heart that became entangled and made similar to chains , and they are detestable from the sweat.
ובית הסתרים באשה – because the hair is seized and becomes entangled at that same place on account of the sweat and the fifth and soiling . And especially with regard to a married woman who is stringent with herself so that she doesn’t become repulsive to her husband that the woman’s private parts is an interposition, but with a free woman who is not so stringent, the woman’s private parts are not an interposition.
לפלוף (pus sticking around the eye) – filthy matter of the eye.
גליד (scab of a wound, crust) – spittle/discharge that comes out from the wound when it dries and becomes a scab/crust.
ושרף היבש (dried sap/resin) – if it there was on her flesh from the resin that drips from the trees or from the fruit, and dried up there.
גלדי צואה שעל בשרו – that dried up and became a scab/crust.
והמלמולין (crumb-like particles of dirty or sweaty hands when rubbed against each other) – when the hands of a person are dirty with plaster or with dough or sweat and he rubs his hands one on the other, his hand becomes like grains of barley.
בשל מריקה (a sort of earth used for polishing) – plaster/clay that is steeped in the white of an egg, if is made to repair with it a utensil that was chipped (i.e., like a putty), that the water does not polish/cleanse it. The language of מריקה is (Esther 2:12): “women’s cosmetics.” But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.
יתדות דרכים (way-mark of hardened clay pegs – cross-path laid out with whitened pegs of baked mud or clay) – plaster/clay that was flattened through the walking of people that walk upon it. And it is moist, it is called a white earth/chalk, but when it is dry it is called the way-mark of hardened clay pegs, that is hard to walk upon them and appears as if one is walking upon pegs.
אין טובלין בהם – if plaster/clay like this was in the Mikveh.
ואין מטבילין אותן – if it was on his flesh. And there are those who interpret/explain that we don’t immerse them if their waters were [ritually] defiled, for contact between liquids is not effective in a place of plaster/clay.
הקומקום (kettle) – a copper utensil in which one heats water, and on account of the smoke and the flame that goes up on its sides, it makes charcoals around it.
אלא אם כן ישפשף (unless one scrapes) – the charcoal that is upon it.

Mishnah 3

ובית הסתרים באיש – for a man is not stringent [concerning this part of his body]. And even a woman is not stringent unless she is married as we have explained (see Mishnah 2 above).
ושאינו מקפיד עליו אינו חוצץ – and for him as long as it isn’t on the majority of his body. And the legal decision regarding interposition – the majority of the body and he is stringent about it, it interposes according to the words of the Torah. A minority thereof, that is to say, if the thing that interposes is in the minority of the body even though he is stringent/he is mindful of it , it does not interpose according to the words of the Torah. But the Sages decreed that on the majority [of the body] and he is not mindful about it because of the majority that he is mindful about, and on the minority that he is mindful about also because of the majority that he is mindful about. But they did not make a decree regarding the minority that he is not mindful about because of the minority that he is mindful of, for this is the body of the decree and we hold that we make a decree on a preventive measure in order to prevent the violation of another preventive measure.

Mishnah 4

לפלוף שבעין – with that which is moist that dos not interpose, [but] with dry, it interposes, for outside of the eye that is above (see Mishnah 2), whether dealing with something moist or dry, it interposes. And the reason for this is that outside of the eye, a person is mindful about it whether it is moist or whether it is dry, [whereas] within the eye, a person is mindful of something dry, but something moist, he is not mindful of it.
כשות של קטן (downy hair growth of a youth before puberty) – a kind of hair that originates within the flesh of young boys , similar to the hair that originates on cucumbers that we call FAKORS in Arabic. And this hair is called the tuft/fine hairs of cucumbers in the language of the Mishnah (i.e., cucumbers or melons in an early stage when they are pubescent), such is the hair of young boys that is similar to it which is called the down hair growth of a youth before puberty, but the women call it the hair of an imbecile.
לא טמא – if ritual impurity did come in contact with that hair, the young child is not defiled.
ולא מטמא – if the young boy was ritually impure with one of the primary forms of ritual impurity, and a person touched that hair but did not touch his flesh, the person who touched him is not ritually impure, for this hair is not considered to be a handle to bring in ritual impurity or to remove it.

Mishnah 5

והמור (myrrh)– MOSKO in the foreign tongue. And there are books that have the reading "וחמר".
דרגש (footstool in front of a high bed) – a small bed. In the Aramaic translation/Targum, (Ezekiel 23:41): “and you sat on a grand couch [with a set table in front of it -and it was My incense and My oil you laid upon it],” these are דרגשין/footstools in front of a high bed.
על הנקיים חוצציין – because they are mindful of them.
בלוסין (utensils soaked with a mixture of colors (i.e., stains from use) – dirty. Similar to it is what is in the Gemara in the chapter, “The Great Principle”/כלל גדול [Shabbat 76b) – a dough of unsifted flour (with bran).
אינן חוצצין – because they are not mindful of them. And that is the reason we are talking about the beds of an houseowner and a poor person.
איכוף – like an אוכף/saddle. And it is [made] of leather and we place it on the donkey when it carries a burden.
זקקין (saddles used by dealers in hose) – those who carry the leather bottles/skins. The language of hose/זיקא whether the tied-up wine skin was filled entirely or whether it was lacking, is permitted in Tractate Avodah Zarah 60a.
אינו חוצץ – for they are not mindful about the dirtiness.
עד כאיסר האיטלקי – which is wide like four grains of barley, it interposes; less than this it does not interpose. But the first Tanna/teacher does not give a measurement, but even less than an Issar, it interposes. And the Halakha is according to the first Tanna/teacher.

Mishnah 6

משני צדדין – that it passes over from two sides of the clothing.
של בנאים – Sages who engage in the building of the world and are mindful of the greasy stains that are on their clothing, for Rabbi Yohanan stated (Talmud Shabbat 114a): Any Sage upon whom grease is found on his clothing is liable for death.
ושל בור – worse than a common, uneducated person (i.e. more correctly, someone who is not meticulous in his observance of the commandments), for he is not mindful of the dirty that is in his clothes unless it comes out from side to side, and the pack-saddle or cushion that we stated above (i.e., see the previous Mishnah) that it interposes, that is when it passes from both sides. So that there should not be a pack-saddle that is more important than the clothing of a common, uneducated person. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 7

זפתין (pitch/asphalt workers) – those who apply pitch to barrels. Alternatively, those who make the pitch/asphalt.
מפסלי אילנות (trimmers of trees) – that take the refuse from the trees. Another explanation: Those who cut down the trees. The language of (Exodus 34:1): “Carve [for yourself] (two tablets of stone like the first),” that he cuts the branches from the tree in order that it should become thick and that the body of the tree will grow.
של קייצין – who spread them out in the sun to dry out the fruit of the summer. Another explanation: those who collect the summer fruit. But all of these are not mindful regarding the dirtiness of their aprons. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.

Chapter 10



Mishnah 1

כל ידות הכלים – as for example, the handle of hatchet/mattock and those of a similar manner he inserted it with an iron tool.
שלא כדרכה – in a curve.
ולא מירקן (but did not finish them off – so that it fitted accurately) – but he did not complete their insertion. It is the language of "ומירק אחר שחיטה על ידו" /and another completed the ritual slaughter on his behalf, in Tractate Yoma 32b (but also in the Mishnah found in Tractate Yoma 31b or Chapter 3, Mishnah 4).
או שמירקן – that he completed their insertion but they broke.
כלי שהטבילו דרך פיו כאילו לא טבל – for every utensil that at the beginning of its insertion in water, he turns it upside down/inverts it on its mouth, the water does not enter in it ever even if he inserts all of it until he turns it [on its side].
בלא הזיבורית (if the vessel to be immersed has no saucer – a rim at the bottom, wider than the belly of the vessel, and which forces the water into the belly) – that he did not immerse the handle or something additional that is the utensil has on one of its ends, and for this they call it זיבורית that it is not of the essence of the utensil, and the water does not come on them until he turns it on its side. And all of these of our Mishnah the reason for all of them is that water will come on all of them.
קלמרין (inkstand – of ordinary men with a rim bent inside to prevent spilling) – a utensil that one places in it the ink. And similarly, we call it in the Roman language KALMARO. And there are of them where their mouths are sunk within them in order that the ink does not spill, even if it will be turned upside down on its mouth. But if he immersed it in its appropriate manner, the water does not enter into the sunken space that surrounds the mouth from inside, therefore, one needs to make an incision from the side.

Mishnah 2

הכר (mattress)– that he lies down upon.
הכסת (pillow [cases] of leather) – that he places underneath his head.
שיבואו בהן המים – inside them. For it is the manner of the mattress and pillow cases of leather to insert and to remove what is within them.
כסת עגולה – [round] and small [pillows] that the princes make under their heds.
הכדור – PALUTA
והאמום (shoe-maker’s last) – the frame/mold that they make upon it the shoe. And it is made of leather and they fill it with hair or hackled wool (i.e., to soften them).
והקמיע (and an amulet) – of writing [of names/verses] or sterile covered with leather.
ותפלה – either of the hand or of the head.
אינו צריך שיבואו בהן מים – for it is not the practice to insert or to remove what is within them (i.e., parchments).

Mishnah 3

קשרי העני – the clothing of a poor man that were torn and knotted, this knot is not made to be release/undone ever, therefore one does not need to loosened it at the time of ritual immersion in order that the water would come upon it.
הנימין (cord,string) – the cords/string and the twisted threads on the rim of the sheet for beauty and they make knots with them, and they are not made to be loosened ever.
חבט של סנדל (thongs of a sandal joined in a knot) – the handles that the straps of a sandal have, one does not have to loosen their knot at the time of ritual immersion, for this knot is not made to be loosened.
בזמן שהיא חוצה – that the knot interposes, that the water does not enter into it. And when will this be? At the time when the knot is fastened well, and then it is not made to be loosened. But since it is made to last, one does not need to release/loosen it at the time of ritual immersion.
ושל זרוע – the knot of the phylactery/tefillin of the hand.
בשמן שאינה עולה ויורדת – and the knot is fasted a great deal and the strap does not ascend or descend upon it.
ואזני החמת (handgrip of a waterskin) – the handgrip of the leather bottle that in them tight connections.
תורמל – a large leather pouch that the shepherds carry. And in the language of Scripture it is called a ילקוט/receptacle, wallet (see First Samuel, Chapter 17, Verse 40: “[He took his stick, picked a few smooth stones from the wadi,] put them in the pocket of his shepherd’s bag [and sling in hand, he went toward the Philistine].”

Mishnah 4

פרקסין (underwear/shirt) – the underclothes that are upon the skin, and this is open at the shoulders, and when he wears it, he ties it on the shoulder, and at the time of removal/stripping, he loosens it.
ושפה של סדין צריך למתה – the folds/creases that are in the upper rim/hem in order that the water can come between those folds/creases.
למתח (to stretch) – to stretch them and to draw them out/extend them, like (Isaiah 40:22): “Stretched them out like a tent to dwell in.”
ושנץ של סנדל (laces of a sandal) – straps that one ties/knots them.
עד שיבעבעו (of garments dipped in water until they are soaked thru and cease from bulging) – when a person immerses clothing in the water, they emerge like kinds of bubbles/bulges and when they are launder and liquid drips from them, when the water begins to bulge, they have been purified, because they have been in contact with the water that has been absorbed by them to the waters of the Mikveh, but when they are dried, the water does not come into all of it until they have ceased from bulging. That when a person immerses a sheet and is not able to stretch it out, for the Mikveh is not that wide, he inserts it in the water when it is folded up, and through it the water bulges/bubbles, but when they rest from bulging it is known that the waters came through all of it.

Mishnah 5

מטבילן עד מקום המדה (one immerses them up to the point of their proper measure) – and the rest does not require ritual immersion, for all that are stand to be cut off is considered as something cut off. And there is no interposition to the place of the cutting itself, for the covered parts of utensils do not require being in water like that of a human being, and they permit the covered parts of utensils on the covered parts of humans, for whereas the covered parts of a person, assuming that they don’t require water coming on them, we do need that they are worthy for water to come on them, but the covered pars of utensils, even if they are worthy for water to come upon them, it is not necessary, for a person is not particular/mindful there.
ר' יהודה אומר כו' – but the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
מטבילין עד מקום המדה – until [a length] of four [handbreadths] for a large [bucket] and up to ten [handbreadths] for a small [bucket], and the remainder is ritually pure and does not require ritual immersion, and even if the measure ended at half of ring in the chain, there is no need to immerse other than up until one-half of the ring.
ר' טרפון אומר עד שיטבול את כל הטבעת – for the measure had ended at its half. And the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Tarfon.

Mishnah 6

אין מטבילין חמין בצונן – that food and liquid do not have ritual purity in a Mikveh, but rather, only the water that had been defiled only, because of contact and connection between liquids, but contact between liquids is only effective in cases of one [kind of liquid] mixed with something similar, warm with warm, fresh [water] with fresh [water] and bitter [water] with bitter [water], but one type mixed with another type, the contact between liquids is not effective and the waters were not purified.
מלא משקין – as for example, wine and oil and fruit juice and all liquids other than water.
כאילו לא טבל – because they interpose. And especially, that their appearance didn’t change, that they were not abolished in the water.
מלא מי רגלין רואין אותן כאילו הן מים – for urine is a kind of water, and when the waters of the Mikveh come in contact with them, a connection is made to them, and they do not interpose and the utensil is purified. But there are books that have the reading: "רואין אותן כאילו הם יין"/we see them as if they are wine, but if their appearance would change and they return to the appearance of water, they are nullified in the water and the utensil is purified. And like this reading is found in the Tosefta [Mikvaot, Chapter 7, Halakha 4].
מלא מי חטאת – water that had been sanctified in the ashes of the [Red] Heifer. And from them we sprinkle on those who are [ritually] impure through contact with the dead.
עד ירבו המים על מי חטאת – that most of the utensil will be empty in order that the waters of the Mikveh that enter the utensil will be greater than the waters of purification [from the Red Heifer] that would be within it. For if not, he still remains in his [ritual] defilement and they (i.e., the waters) are like the rest of the liquids that interpose between the utensil and the waters of the Mikveh.
כור – thirty Seah.
ואין בו אלא רביעית – waters of purification [from the Red Heifer], or the rest of the liquids.
כאילו לא טבל – for Rabbi Yossi holds that a quarter [LOG] of liquids or a quarter [LOG] of waters of purification [from the Red Heifer], invalidate ritual immersion, and interpose even within a large utensil, until he removes the quarter [LOG] of liquids or of the waters of purification [from the Red Heifer] and he returns and immerses them empty. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yossi.

Mishnah 7

כל האוכלים מצטרפין – [if] one consume impure foods from several kinds and there is in all of them like one-half of a furrow (i.e., a field of a square P’ras, declared unclean on account of crushed bones carried over it from a ploughed grave) which is two eggs [bulk] according to Rashi and an egg-and-a-half according to the words of Maimonides (see also Tractate Meilah, Chapter 4, Mishnah 5), they combine to invalidate his body from consuming heave-offering [if he is a Kohen]. And similarly, if he drank from several kinds of the seven liquids which are water, wine, olive oil, honey, milk, blood and dew, for these alone are called liquids. All of these combine one with the other to invalidate the body with one-quarter of a LOG, as it is written (Leviticus 11:34): “As to any food that may be eaten, it shall become unclean if it came in contact with water, or to any liquid that may be drunk, [it shall become unclean if it was inside any vessel],” it teaches on the food-stuffs that they all combine and on all the liquids that all of them combine.
שעשו בו שאר משקין – to invalidate the body.
כמים – but the rest of the liquids invalidate the Mikveh with three LOG like water. Alternatively, the rest of the liquids complete the measurement of the Mikveh for forty Seah like water, as it is written (Leviticus 11:36): “[However, a spring or cistern] in which water is collected [shall be clean],” but not a Mikveh of the rest of the liquids.

Mishnah 8

שתה משקין טמאין – other liquids other than water.
שאינן טהורים בגוף – the [ritual] immersion did not count for them through the immersion of the body, for food and liquid outside of water do not have ritual purity in the Mikveh.
אבל שתה מים טמאין וטבל – they are [ritually] pure in the body, and they have purity in the Mikveh through contact between liquids [placing iit in a container and submerging the container in a ritual bath so that the water of the ritual bath comes in contact with the impure water].
הרי הוא כמות שהיתה – pure like it was, that saves it while it is still absorbed so that it would not become defiled.
טובל ואוכל בתרומה – for impurity that is absorbed doe not defile others.
בזמן שהוא נראה – on his body from the outside.
טובל ואוכל בתרומה – it doesn’t make a difference whether it is an impure arrow or whether it is a pure arrow, it does not interpose through [ritual] immersion all the while that it is not seen.