Hasagot HaRamban on Sefer HaMitzvot
השגות הרמב"ן על ספר המצוות
YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
http://www.torontotorah.com

Hasagot HaRamban on Sefer HaMitzvot

Introduction



Shorashim



On the counting of Mitzvot



Positive Commandments



Positive Commandments Omitted by Rambam



Negative Commandments



Negative Commandments Omitted by Rambam



Mitzvah 1



Mitzvah 2

The second mitzvah [that the Rambam‏ ‏‎“forgot” to include in his Book of‎‏ ‏Mitzvot] is that we have ‎been warned to‏ ‏never forget standing at Har Sinai, and‏ ‏to never remove this event from our‏ ‏consciousness. Rather, our eyes and our‏ ‏hearts should be directed there all of the‏ ‏days. It is as the ‎Exalted One said, “Be‏ ‏careful, and guard your soul greatly, lest you forget the things that your eyes ‎saw‏ ‏and lest they leave your heart all the‏ ‏days of your life. And you shall make‏ ‏them known to ‎your children and their‏ ‏children - the day that you stood before‏ ‏Hashem your G-d at Chorev,‎‏ ‏etc.” ‎‎(Devarim 4:9-10).‎‏ ‏The intent in this [commandment] is of tremendous importance. For if the words ‎of Torah were to come upon us only from the mouth of the prophet, peace be upon him, then ‎even if his prophecy was demonstrated to us to be truthful with signs and with wonders, if at some ‎later point in time a prophet or dreamer would arise and command us to do something which was ‎against the Torah, providing signs and wonders [to support his words], the Torah would be ‎removed by the second [prophet], or [at the very least] an uncertainty could enter our hearts over ‎this issue.‎‏ ‏However, once the explanation of the Torah arrived to our ears from the Mouth of G-d ‎and our eyes saw that there was no intermediary, we will refute any who argue or present doubt ‎and we will demonstrate his falseness. Signs won’t benefit him, nor will any wonder save him from ‎our hands. For we will recognize and testify to his falsehoods and recklessness. This is the meaning ‎of the statement regarding the gathering at Sinai, “And in you [Moshe] they shall always believe.” ‎‎(Shemot 19:9). This is[also] the meaning of the passage, “If a prophet or dreamer shall rise up ‎amongst you etc.” (Devarim 13:2). The master [Rambam] has already explained his in the Book of ‎Knowledge (The Foundations of the Torah, Chapter 8). And this is a critical foundation of the Torah ‎and is the prohibition that comes to us from the verse, “lest you forget the things that your eyes ‎saw.” It is a warning lest they leave your heart, such that you will not don’t convey them to your ‎children and their children through all of the generations.‎

Conclusion

