Mishneh Torah, Overview of Mishneh Torah Contents
משנה תורה, תוכן החיבור
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Mishneh Torah, Overview of Mishneh Torah Contents

Chapter 1

I have seen fit to divide this treatise into 14 books.
The first book: I will include in this all the commandments that are essential to the religion of Moses our teacher, and one needs to know them before anything else - for example, the unity of His name, may He be blessed, and the prohibition of pagan worship. I have called this book  "Sefer HaMadda" - "The Book of Knowledge".
The second book: I will include in this the most frequent commandments, which we were commanded to do them in order to love the Omnipresent and to always remember Him - for example, the reading of the Shema, prayer, tefilin, blessings; and circumcision is included in this, for this is a sign on our skin to always remember, in a time in which we have no tefilin, nor tzitzit, etc. And I have called this book "Sefer Ahava" - "The Book of Love".
The third book: I will include in this all commandments that are known through time - for example, Shabbat, and the holidays. And I have called this book "Sefer Zemanim" - "The Book of Times".
The fourth book: I will include in this the commandments involving marriage - for example marriage (kiddushin) and divorce, and Levirite marriage (yibum) and  the ceremony of the Removed Sandal (halitza).
The fifth book: I will include in this the commandments involving forbidden sexual relationships, and the commandments involving forbidden foods - for these are both subjects in which the Omnipresent sanctified us, and separated us from the gentiles, through forbidden sexual relationships and forbidden foods, and for both of these it is said, "And I separated you from the nations" (Leviticus 20:26), "Which I separated you from the nations" (Leviticus 20:24). And I have called this book "Sefer Kedusha" - "The Book of Holiness".
The sixth book: I will include the commandments involving what a person is obligated in when he forbids himself from something - for example, vows and oaths. I have called this book "Sefer Haflaah" - "The Book of Utterances".
The seventh book: I will include the commandments that involve agriculture of the Land - for example, Sabbaticals and Jubilees, tithes and donations, and the rest of the commandments that are included in those topics. I have called this book "Sefer Zeraim" - "The Book of Seeds."
The eight book: I will include the commandments that involve building the Sanctuary, and the daily public sacrifices. And I have called this book "Sefer Avoda" - "The Book of Worship".