Bartenura on Mishnah Challah
ברטנורא על משנה חלה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Bartenura_on_Mishnah_Challah
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Bartenura on Mishnah, trans. by Rabbi Robert Alpert, 2020
-http://sefaria.org/

Bartenura on Mishnah Challah



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

חמשה דברים חייבים בחלה – We draw a conclusion by analogy of [the word] חלה from [the word] "פסח"/Passover. It is stated concerning “Passover” the commandment of the bread of affliction (Deuteronomy 16:3): “[You shall not eat anything leavened with it;] for seven days thereafter, you shall eat unleavened bread, bread of distress – [for you departed from the land of Egypt hastily – so that you may remember the day of your departure from the land of Egypt as long as you live].” And it is stated [the word] "לחם" /”bread,” with regard to Hallah (Numbers 15:19): “And you eat of the bread of the land…” Just as “bread” that is stated on Passover, a matter that comes to be leavened/soured, so too “bread” that is mentioned with Hallah- something that comes to be leavened/soured and you have nothing that comes to be leavened/soured other than only these five species.
ומצטרפין זה עם זה – to complete the definite quantity of started dough required [to separate] Hallah, bit they all do not combine together, for a species with something that is not of the same species does combine together, as is taught in the Mishnah further ahead at the beginning of Chapter Four (Mishnah 2), but rather wheat combines with spelt alone because they are its species (see Talmud Pesahim 35a). And barley combines with everything except for wheat, and even though spelt is a species of wheat, it is not specifically a species of wheat, but it is a species of barley and even a kind of wheat that combines with wheat and barley. But the Jerusalem Talmud implies that if they (i.e., the five species) were kneaded together, they would combine even for a species with something that is not of the same species. But if they were not kneaded together but rather that afterwards, the doughs came in contact with/touched each other, one species with something of its own kind combine; but with something of a different species, they do not combine [to make definite quantity of started dough required to separate Hallah].
ואסורים בחדש – As it is written (Leviticus 23:14): “[Until that very day, until you have brought the offering of your God,] you shall eat no bread or parched grain or fresh ears (i.e., of the new crop);…” and we draw a conclusion by analogy of the words "לחם", "לחם" /”bread,” “bread” from Passover.
מלקצור מלפני הפסח – since it is forbidden to reap from one of the five species prior to the reaping of the Omer, as it is written with [regard to] the Omer (Leviticus 23:10): “…[you shall bring] the first sheaf of your harvest [to the priest],” that it will be the first of all that is reaped. And you bring [the analogy] of: ראשית, ראשית" / “first,” “first” from Hallah. It is written there (Numbers 15:20): “as the first yield of your baking, [you shall set aside a loaf as a gift]…” and it is written here (Leviticus 23:10): “[you shall bring] the first sheaf of your harvest [to the priest].” Just as there it must be from the five species, so too here from the five species.
ואם השרישו – one from these five species, prior o he reaping of the Omer.
העומר מתירן – and you are permitted to reap after the reaping of he Omer, as it is written (Exodus 23:16): “[And the Feast of the Harvest, of the first fruits of your work,] of what you sew in the field;…],” from the time that it is sewn and takes root in the field.
ואם לאו – if they did not take root other than after the reaping of the Omer.
אסורים עד שיבא עומר הבא – of the next year.

Mishnah 2

יצא ידי חובתו – As it is written (Deuteronomy 16:3): “You shall not eat anything leavened with it; for seven days thereafter you shall eat unleavened bread….,” things that come to be leavened, a person fulfills through them his religious obligation of [eating] Matzah/unleavened bread; things that do not come to be leavened, a person does not fulfill through them the religious obligation of [eating] Matzah.
נתערב אחד מהן בכל המינים – one of these species was mixed up with the rest of the mixture, such as Babylonian preserve consisting of soul milk, bread-crusts and salt and Median [date] beer (into which they put a concoction of barley – see Talmud Pesahim 42b).
ה"ז עובר בפסח – on “lest it be seen” (Exodus 13:7) and “lest it be found”(Exodus 12:19), and if he placed it in his domain.
הנודר מן הדגן אסור בכל המינים – for "דגן" /grain implies everything which is piled up (see Talmud Nedarim 55a) for pulse/beans/peas and seeds are things which are piled up.
אינו אסור אלא בהן – for grain/piles/bread and grain are the same, and the Halakha is according to the Sages.
וחייבים בחלה ובמעשרות – since it was necessary to teach “ which are [those things] that are liable for Hallah and exempt from tithes, and which are [those things] that are liable for tithing and exempt from Hallah, the Tanna [of our Mishnah] taught here, “and are liable for Hallah and tithes.

Mishnah 3

הלקט והשכחה והפאה וההפקר – are exempt from the tithes, as it is written (Deuteronomy 14:29): “Then the Levite, who has no hereditary portion as you have…,” from what you have and what he lacks, you are obligated to give to him, excluding those who have what you have with you.
ומותר העומר – for the Omer would come from three Seahs, and we remove from it a tenth of fine flour winnowed with thirteen sieves and the remainder is redeemed and eaten by all people, and he is liable for Hallah but exempt from tithes, because at the time of the smoothing of the pile, it was dedicated to the Temple.
ותבואה שלא הביאה שליש – is liable for Hallah, and even it comes to be leavened, and every thing that comes to be leavened, is called “bread,” and is liable for Hallah, but is exempt from tithing, for regarding tithes, it is written (Deuteronomy 14:22): “[You shall set aside every year a tenth part of all] the yield of your sowing [that is brought from the field];” a thing that we plant it and it grows, and that which if we don’t sow, it does not grow.
תבואה שלא הביאה שליש פטורה מן החלה – as it is written (Numbers 15:20): “…you shall set it aside as a gift like the gift from the threshing floor;” just as priest’s due does not come from grain that did not bring forth [at least] a third [of its growth], so also Hallah does not come from grain that did not bring forth [at least] a third [of its growth]. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Eliezer.

Mishnah 4

ופרגין – we call it KASHKASH in Arabic and in foreign language, POPORRO.
ופחות מחמשת רבעים בתבואה – grain that makes less than five quarts of flour is obligated in tithes. And the dough that is kneaded from this flour is exempt from the Hallah, since the measure of the dough be liable for Hallah is five-forths flour and more, that is, a bit more than five quarts.
הסופגנים – bread whose mixture is soft and is made like a sponge. Another explanation: thin wafers; its Aramaic translation of wafers of unleavened bread, sponge-cake and spongy-bread.
הדובשנים – fried in honey. Alternatively, kneaded in honey.
האסקריטין – the Aramaic translation of a tenacious batter dripped on a hot griddle (a sort of waffle), a kind of paste, and their mixture is very soft.
וחלת המשרת – Challah that is like a paste prepared in a pan by stirring (i.e., a dumpling). The Aramaic translation of a pan is a camp/resting place.
המדומע – a SEAH of priest’s due that fell in less than one-hundred SEAH of non-sacred dough, and they were made altogether into something, otherwise usually exempt, but now subject to the law of priest’s due, and it is forbidden to foreigner (i.e., non-Kohanim), and is exempt from Hallah, as it is written (Numbers 15:20): “…you shall it aside as a gift…,” and not something that had already been set aside.

Mishnah 5

עסה שתחלתה סופגנים – such as dough whose mixture is soft.
וסופה סופגנים – when they are fried in oil and honey or cooked in water.
תחילתה עיסה וסופה סופגנים – when its mixture is thick and afterwards we fry it in oil and honey or cook it in water.
תחלתה סופגנין וסופה עיסה – its mixture is soft and we bake it in an oven.
קנובקאות – bread that we restore it to its sifted fine flour, and make of it food for babies.

Mishnah 6

המעיסה – flour on top of boilin water.
החליטה – boiling water on top of four, and it explains in the Gemara that these are two Tannaim, and he who taught this did not teach that, for one Tannah taught concerning a paste made of flour on which boiling water is poured and the same law applies for a paste made of flour stirring in boiling water, and he holds that whether dealing with a paste made of flour on which boiling water is poured or a paste made of flour stirring in boiling water, the School of Shammai exempts and the School of Hillel obligates [the giving of Hallah]. And the other Tanna taught: a paste made of flour stirring in boiling water and the same law applies for a paste made of flour on which boiling water is poured, and he holds that whether one speaks of a paste made of flour on which boiling water is poured or paste made of flour stirring in boiling water, the School of Shammai obligates [the giving of Hallah] whereas the School of Hillel exempts. But in regard to a legal decision, whether one is dealing with a paste made of flour on which boiling water is poured or a paste made of flour stirring in boiling water, if it is baked in an oven, they are obligated in giving Hallah. And if it is in a deep and covered pan or in a pan [without a lid] (see Mishnah Menahot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 8) or with all things that the fire passes underneath, are exempt from Hallah.
עשאן לעצמו – for the needs of his thanksgiving offering or his Naziriteship.
פטור – since he rolled them to sanctify them as it is written (Numbers 15:21): “[You shall make a gift to the LORD from the first yield] of your baking [throughout the ages],” but not sanctified dough.
למכור בשוק – to people who require for loaves for thanksgiving and wafers of the Nazirite.
חייב – for all that is for the marketplace he would counsel/advise; if you sell it, sell it, and if not, I personally will eat them.

Mishnah 7

נחתום שעשה שאור לחלק – and there is within it enough for the obligation [to separate] Hallah, but if it is intention to sell it to people toto divide it into a few [pieces of] dough, and each part does not have the [requisite] measure.
חייב בחלה – for it is his intention that if he does not find purchasers that he would make it into dough and bake it all as one.

Mishnah 8

עיסת כלבים – it is made from flour and much coarse bran is mixed into it.
בזמן שהרועים אוכלים ממנה – that the coarse bran was not mixed into it so much.
חייבת בחלה – for since it is fit for shepherds, they call it bread.
ומערבין בה – for buildings with a common court [they make an Eruv], to take out [food] from one’s home to the courtyard.
ומשתתפין בה – the formation of a fictitious partnership in an alley, to remove [food] from the courtyard to the alley.
ומברכין עליה – The Blessings on Bread (i.e., HaMotzi)
ומזמנין עליה – three [people] who ate from it are obligated to recite Birkat HaMazon (see Mishnah Berakhot, Chapter 7, Mishnah 1).
ונאפית ביום טוב – because of the portion of the shepherds.
ואדם יוצא בה ידי חובתו בפסח – The first night [of Passover] when a person is obligated to eat an olive’s bulk of Matzah.
אינה חייבת בחלה – as it is written (Numbers 15:20): “As the first yield of your baking….”; what is yours is liable, and not that of a beast.
מטמאה טומאת אוכלין – since on account of an emergency, it is eaten by humans; he defiles it until it is invalid to feed to a dog.

Mishnah 9

חייבין עליהן מיתה – A foreigner (i.e. non-Kohen) who eats them (i.e., Hallah) willfully is liable for death by the hand of heaven, for Hallah is called “Terumah”/heave-offering, as with Terumah, it is written (Leviticus 22:9): “….and die for it, having committed profanation…”
וחומש – he who eats them (i.e., Hallah) inadvertently, pays the principal to the owners and a fifth to any Kohen that he desires.
ואסורים לזרים – it is taught gratuitously, for since foreigners are liable for them (i.e., eating Hallah) death and one-fifth, it is obvious that they are forbidden to foreigner. And to Rabbi Yohanan, who said one-half measure according to the Torah, we found to say that since it teaches that it is forbidden to foreigners – for a half-measure, it has neither death nor the one-fifth (penalty). But, there is, however, the prohibition from the Torah.
והן נכסי כהן – that he is able to sell them and purchase with them slaves and land and impure cattle.
ועולין באחד ומאה – if they were combined with one hundred [parts] of non-sacred [food].
וטעונים רחיצת ידים – He who comes in contact with them must wash his hands first, for mere hands invalidate the Terumah, for even the Hallah is called Terumah.
והערב שמש – an impure [Kohen] who immersed [in a ritual bath] does not eat Terumah until sunset (see Mishnah Berakhot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1 and the Bartenura there), as it is written (Leviticus 22:7): “As soon as the sun sets, he shall be clean; and afterward he may eat of the sacred donations, [for they are his food],” and the same law applies to Hallah.
ואינן ניטלים מן הטהור על הטמא – this is a decree, lest he dedicate as sacred- property that which is not from that which is brought near, because they doubt lest the impure comes in contact with the pure and defile it, and we require that a person who dedicates [to the Sanctuary] will dedicate from what is near, as is taught shortly.
ואין ניטלין אלא מן המוקף – We have the reading, and the explanation of [the word] "מוקף" is near and next to.
מן הדבר הגמור – that their work has been completed and [in this regard] Hallah once the dough is rolled.
עד שישייר מקצת – that [both for] Hallah and Terumah, it is written, "ראשית" (see Numbers 15:20 – “As the first ("ראשית") yield [of your baking]….”); and we require that their remnants are recognized.

Chapter 2



Mishnah 1

פירות חוצה לארץ שנכנסו לארץ חייבין בחלה – as it is written (Numbers 15:18): “…the land to which I am taking you.” "שמה" /there – you are liable whether with the produce of the land or the produce of outside the Land [for Hallah].
מכאן לשם – from the land of Israel to outside the Land of Israel.
ר"א מחייב – As it is written (Numbers 15:19): “And you eat of the bread of the land…,” whether you eat it in the Land [of Israel] whether you eat it outside the Land [of Israel], for since it is the bread of the Land [of Israel], it is liable for Hallah [to be separated].
ור"ע פוטר – that [the word] "שמה" /”there” implies a limitation. “There” you are obligated, but you are not obligated outside the Land., even though you eat from the bread of the Land. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Akiva.

Mishnah 2

עפר חו"ל הבא מספינה לארץ – we are speaking about a perforated ship, and clods of earth close up the perforation so that water cannot enter in it.
חייבת במעשרות – if he sowed and grew seeds in the dust/mud that is in the ship, and even though that is dust/mud from outside of the Land of Israel, for since it is perforated, the seed absorbs from the moistness of the dust/mud of the Land of Israel.
אימתי בזמן שהספינה גוששת – it comes in contact with clumps of dust/mud, that is to say, that it is cleaves to the earth.
עיסה שנילושה במי פירות חייבת בחלה – In the Jerusalem Talmud it proves a bit that the Halakha is not like the anonymous Mishnah. Dough that was kneaded in fruit juice is exempt from Hallah. Therefore, we should not knead dough that has in it the measurement for Hallah in the juice of eggs or in fruit juice alone without a combination of water, since the Halakah is not made clear if it is liable for Hallah or exempt.
ונאכלת בידים מסואבות – for food does not become susceptible to becoming ritually impure until water comes upon it, or one of the seven liquids, and [just as] it does not become susceptible to becoming ritually impure, unclean hands do not defile it.

Mishnah 3

וקוצה חלתה ערומה – she separates the Hallah and makes the blessing on its separation, while the facing of the bed is downwards fastened to the ground and all of her nakedness is covered. But the contact of her posterior (i.e., buttocks) does not come into the class of indecency regarding the [recitation of the] blessing. But a man cannot recite the blessing while naked, for it is impossible for him to cover his nakedness as the sacks and the membrum virile project.
מי שאינו יכול לעשות עיסתו בטהרה – like the case when he is ritually impure, and there isn’t [water] of forty Seah in which he can immerse [himself].
יעשנה קבין – He should make all of his dough into individual Kabs, in order that they would not become liable for Hallah and then need to separate them while ritually impure.
יעשנה בטומאה – for this is more preferable than from what [he must do] so that he can be exempt his dough from Hallah, and there would be no part to be [designated] by name. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Akiva.

Mishnah 4

קבים – Kab by Kab on its own
ונגעו זה בזה – their coming into contact does not combine them to be liable for Hallah.
עד שישוכו – that they would stick one to the other so much that if one comes to separate them, they would be detached from this one to [become attached] to that one.
אף הרודה ונותן לסל – He who detaches Hallot from [where they stick on] the oven after they have baked and places them in the basket.
הסל מצרפן לחלה – and even though they don’t stick together, and the Halakha is according to Rabbi Eliezer. But the fact that the Rabbis require sticking together and Rabbi Eliezer [requires] coming into contact/touching, these words are to combine two pieces of dough together, for each one is not according to the [required] measure [for Hallah]. But regarding the matter of devoting for sacred purposes from that which is near, even contact is not required, but they must be near one to the other. And at the end of the chapter (Mishnah 8) when Rabbi Eliezer that one puts less than an egg’s [bulk] in the middle in order to dedicate sacred gifts from that which is near, so we see, that we require contact for the purpose of being near, pure and impure is different because it is a matter which one is strict with its mixture, but the utensil does not combine.

Mishnah 5

אינו חלה – for it is written (Numbers 15:20): “as the first yield of our baking…”
וגזל ביד כהן – and he must return it to their owners, for if it remains in his hand, he would think that his dough is exempt.
העיסה עצמה – that which he separated its Hallah as flour, is liable for Hallah.
והקמח – that comes into the hand of the Kohen with the designation of Hallah.
אם יש בו כשיעור – five-fourths of flour which is liable for Hallah.
ואסורה לזרים – all the flour that comes in to the hand of the Kohen, and this is a mere stringency, because they saw that it comes into the land of a Kohen, that they won’t say that we saw a foreigner eating Hallot.
וקפשה זקן זר – an old man who is a foreigner snatched it and ate it.
קלקל לעצמו – that he ate it and was punished.
ותיקן לאחרים – that others eat and leave it in doubt, for they find an opening to permit, since they saw that he ate it.

Mishnah 6

חמשת רבעים – of Kab are liable for Hallah, as it is written (Numbers 15:20): “As the first yield [of your baking, you shall set aside a loaf as a gift…],” and the flour of the wilderness was the quantity of grain in a sheaf as a capitation tax, and the Omer is one-tenth of an Ephah. The Ephah is three Seah, and the Seah is six Kabim; hence we have eighteen Kabim in an Ephah, and the Kab is four Logs; which are seventy-two Logs. A tenth of seventy is seen Logim and the tenth of two Logim is an egg’s bulk and one-fifth of an egg, for the Log is [equivalent to] six eggs. When they came to Jerusalem and they added one-sixth on the measurements, it was found that six Logim were five, and the seenth Log was five eggs. For every six became five, and an egg and the fifth of an egg became an egg. It was found that the Omer that was in the wilderness was seven Logim and an egg and one-fifth of an egg. But in Jerusalem it became six logim. When they came to Sephhoris, and they added one-sixth on he measurements of Jerusalem, so that the six Logim became five, and that is equal to the five-fourths of flour. And the Logim were called fourths, because the Log was one-fourth of a Kab, for a Kab was four Logim.
הן ושאורן – the leaven that they put into it.
וסובן – which is thin
מורסנן – that is thick – all of which combines with the flour to complete the measurement, for a poor person who eats his bread combined with flour combined with bran flour and coarse flour.
ניטל מורסנן מתוכן חוזר לתוכו הרי אלו פטורין – for it is not the manner of dough to restore the coarse bran into it after he took it from there.

Mishnah 7

אחד מעשרים וארבעה – for every house owner, his dough was thin, and less than one twenty-fourth, it lacks what can be a gift, and the Torah stated that it should be given, that it should have within it in order to be given.
והעושה למשתה בנו – even though that he makes a great amount of dough, he does not separate with the dough of the owner.
נחתום העושה למכור בשוק – his dough is greater, and with one in forty- eight, there is where with to give as a gift.
וכן האשה העושה למכור – even though her dough is thin, he does not separate with the bread that is made to sell.
נטמאה – since it stands to be burned one out of forty-eight

Mishnah 8

נטלת מן הטהור על הטמא – and we do not suspect lest they come in contact with each other.
נוטל כדי חלה – the measure of Hallah that one needs to take from the pure and the impure, he takes from that pure dough whose Hallah had not been ritually dedicated.
ונותן פחות מכביצה באמצע – whether ritually impure or pure, for less than an egg’s bulk does not defile, and they set aside the Hallah on that which is less than an egg’s bulk which connects between the impure anad the pure, for the Hallah does not receive ritual impurity in this.
כדי שיטול מן המוקף – that the ritually impure is attached to the ritually pure on that which is less than an egg’s bulk, and it is as if the ritually impure and the pure [are found] in one [piece of] dough.
וחכמים אוסרין – to take from the ritually pure on that which is impure, and we are suspect lest they come in contact with each other, but he should take from the ritually pure to itself, and from the ritually impure to itself. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Chapter 3



Mishnah 1

אוכלין עראי עד שתתגלגל – when it becomes combined well, because there is no designation of the term “dough” until it is rolled [and shaped].
ותטמטם בשעורים – because the dough of barley scatters and does not combine well with the dough of wheat, but rather kneads into a cohesive shapeless mass in the hand
חייב מיתה – for its work had been completed and it is an eatabler forbidden pending the separation of sacred gifts, becomes [liable for] death [if consumed].
מגבהת חלתה – it is the ordinance of the Sages regarding ritually pure dough to rush to separate Hallah in purity, lest the dough become ritually impure, for the essence of the Mitzvah is to wait until the completion of the kneading.
ובלבד שיהא שם חמשת רבעים קמח – that had been combined in water, for less than this, the dough did not reach to the general obligation for Hallah. And there are books which have the reading: ובלבד שלא יהיה שם חמשת רבעים קמח/ and as long as there will not be there five-fourths flour, that is to say, that there should not remain five-fourths flour that was not mixed/combined with water, for if there remained five-fourths, they would not be exempt from Hallah if he separated it prior to be rolled [and shaped]. And in the Jerusalem Talmud, we prove that if he said, “Behold this is Hallah,” on the leaven and on the dough and on the flour that remains after the dough had been rolled [and shaped], all of it is sanctified/dedicated in my hands for the sake of Hallah, this would be permitted. And similarly, a person should teach the women to say this as we separate Hallah, immediately after rolling [and shaping] the dough, but before the forming of the bread.

Mishnah 2

נדמעה עיסתה – The priest’s due was mixed with less than one-hundred parts of non-sacred food. -
משגלגלה חייבת – for since it became liable for Hallah already, further, it cannot be affected by the mixture of Terumah and Hullin.
עד שלא גלגלה תעשה בטומאה – since even if it had been made in ritual purity, no Kohen is permitted to eat it because of the doubt that had resulted in it, for it could have been made ritually impure immediately before rolling [and shaping].
משגלגלה תעשה בטהרה – if after the rolling [and shaping] a doubt would originate, it is prohibited to defile it, for non-sacred food which is subject to sacred gifts for Hallah is considered like Hallah, and Terumah which is made for handling requires guarding.

Mishnah 3

עד שלא גלגלה ופדאתה – but after she redeemed it, she rolled it. חייבת – since at the time of the rolling, it was not dedicated [to the Temple].
שבשעת חובתה היתה פטורה – for the rolling of sanctified produce exempts it, as it is written (Numbers 15:20): “As the first yield] of your baking….” And not the dough that was sanctified [to the Temple].

Mishnah 4

עד שלא באו לעונת המעשרות – each one is according to the statute that is explained in the first chapter of Ma’aserot (see Mishnah 1).
וגמרן הגזבר – and were completed while they were under the hand of the treasurer.
שבשעת חובתן היו פטורים – as it is written, "דגנך"/”your grain” (see Deuteronomy 14:23: “[You shall consume the tithes] of your new grain,[and wine and oil]…” and Deuteronomy 12:17: “[You may not partake in your settlements of the tithes] of your new grain [or wine or oil….”).

Mishnah 5

פטורה מן החלה – for the rolling by an Israelite does not make the dough of a heathen liable [for Hallah], and similarly, the rolling by a heathen of the dough of an Israelite does not make it exempt [from Hallah].
אם אין בשל ישראל כשיעור – that we are obligated to separate Hallah from it, which is five-fourths.

Mishnah 6

ספק חייב – because there is a doubt about a prohibition, and we follow the stricter practice, so we separate the Hallah and sell it to a Kohen.
ואין חייבין עליה חומש – a foreigner (i.e., non-Kohen) who eats it does not pay the additional one-fifth, but he pays the principal. The payments of Terumah are an atonement. Therefore, we separate the payments and atone out of doubt, and sell them to the Kohen.
אחר הקרימה בתנור – for Rabbi Akiba holds that completion of work [to make it liable] for Hallah does not occur until the formation of a light crust on the face of the dough in the oven. And this is the stage for Hallah. Therefore, if he converted prior to the formation of a light crust on the face of the dough in the oven, he is liable for Hallah. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Akiba.

Mishnah 7

אורז – it is not from the species of grain. And all that is not from the species of grain is exempt from Hallah, and a person does not fulfill his religious obligation [for Matzah] from it on Passover.
יש בה טעם דגן חייב בחלה – and even though the grain lacks the measurement for Hallah.

Mishnah 8

אם יש לו פרנסה ממקום אחר – if he has other flour besides from this dough, he brings flour according to the measure, that if he would combine to this measure that is liable for Hallah, it would have five-fourths which is the measure of Hallah, and he kneads the dough and mixes it with the dough that has the measure, and removes from it according to the measure for Hallah that he must separate from the five-fourths.
ואם לאו – if he lacks flour מוציא חלה – one twenty-fourth on each dough, for eatables forbidden pending the separation of sacred gifts are prohibited in any amount in its species, and all of it would be made subject to sacred gifts for Hallah.

Mishnah 9

זיתי מסיק – olives that the owner harvests, and the harvesting of the olives is called “olive harvest.”
זיתי נקוף – olives that the poor people glean, as it says (Isaiah 17:6): “[Only gleanings shall be left of him] as when one beats an olive tree: two berries or three [on the topmost branch…,]” and they are exempt from tithes.
ענבי בציר – which are liable for tithes.
עם ענבי עוללות – which are exempt from tithes.
אם יש לו – other eatables forbidden pending the separation of sacred gifts and similar things, he removes from them the correct proportion according to measure of what he must remove from olive harvests or from vintage grapes that require tithing.
ואם לאו – if he lacks any other eatables forbidden pending the separation of sacred gifts, we see it as if they are all eatables forbidden pending the separation of sacred gifts, and we remove the Priest’s Due and the [Levite’s] tenth of the First Tithe [that goes to the Kohen] on everything.
והשאר מעשר – First [Tithe]
ומעשר שני – or Second Tithe, which we don’t remove other than according to proportion, and not that he should not separate only according to proportion, for behold, it is impossible to separate Terumat Ma’aser (i.e., the tenth of the tenth) until we first separate [First] Tithe on everything. And furthermore, if we do not separate [First] Tithe on everything, everything that he tithes, there is non-sacred produce [contained within] by proportion. And it is found that he would be separating from that which exempt [from tithes] on that which is liable [for tithes], but the tithes have to be separated on everything. But one does not have to give the Levite or to the poor other than according to proportion, and the rest he may combine with his produce. And similarly, the Second Tithe does not have to be redeemed other than by proportion, but Terumah (i.e, the heave-offering to the Kohen of two percent) and Terumat Ma’aser (i.e., tenth of a tenth of the rest which the Levite gives to the Kohen) which are [punishable] by death, when one separates [tithes] on everything, it is found there is found non-sacred produce mixed in, and one must give everything to the Kohen.

Mishnah 10

הנוטל שאור מעיסת חיטין – which had not separated/consecrated its Hallah.
ואם לאו פטורה – for the eatables forbidden pending separation of sacred gifts does not prohibit it, since it lacks taste.
א"כ למה אמרו הטל אוסר בכל שהוא – as we said above (Mishnah 9), if he lacks the means to do so, that he brings Hallah for everything. These words refer to [Hallah] from the same species, but if it is not from the same species, such as the case of wheat with rice, that provides a flavor, for the reason that [we require taking Hallah] from eatables forbidden pending separation of sacred gifts for any amount, because when they permitted that of one wheat [batch], it exempts the entire pile; so too its prohibition, and for that reason it does not belong other than one species with another of the same species.

Chapter 4



Mishnah 1

שתי נשים אפילו הן ממין אחד פטורים – and neither the adhering nor the fusion (i.e., thing contained in one vessel are to be considered as one mass) in a basket does not combine them, since they are strict [in this area]. And even if they kneaded the two Kabs as one, since they are destined to be divided, they are exempt. And the anonymous Mishnah is according to the School of Hillel who say that [we require] two Kabs for Hallah (see Mishnah Eduyot, Chapter 1, Mishnah 2), but it is not the Halakha, for we establish that five-quarters [of dough] is the [minimum] measure for Hallah.

Mishnah 2

החטים אינן מצטרפות עם הכל – if there were two doughs: one of wheat and one of another species of the five species, and there in neither of them had the [sufficient] measure for Hallah, and they adhere to each other.
השעורים מצטרפות עם הכל – even with spelt, and even though this is part of the species of wheat, it is not specifically the species of wheat, but rather the species of barley, and even the species of wheat, and it is explained at the beginning of the first chapter (Mishnah 1 and see the Bartenura there).
שאר המינים מצטרפין זה עם זה – such as spelt, oats and rye. And the Halakha is according to Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri.

Mishnah 3

שני קבין – of one of the five species that are liable for Hallah (see Chapter 1, Mishnah 1).
וקב אורז או תרומה – which are not liable for Hallah in the middle
אין מצטרפין – to become liable for Hallah

Mishnah 4

יטול מן האמצע – from the place that they adhere one to the other, we find that we separate [Hallah] from both of them.
וחכמים אוסרים – for one who sees that it is thought that it is permitted to give priest’s due and to tithe from the new grain [of this year] with the old grain [of last year] and from the old grain [of last year] with the new grain [of this year]. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.
מן הקב – which lacks the [appropriate] measure for Hallah (i.e., five-fourths).
ר"ע אומר חלה – and he that completed the dough afterwards according to the [appropriate] measure for Hallah, for since the measure was completed, it is [liable] for Hallah retroactively.
אינה חלה – since at the time when he separated it, the dough was exempt. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 5

ר"ע פוטר – He follows his line of reasoning that it goes back and becomes Hallah retroactively.
נמצא חומרו קולו – the stringency of Rabbi Akiba who said above (Mishnah 4) that when he takes Hallah from one Kab that becomes Hallah and has become sanctified, causes him to be lenient and to exempt with two Kabim when he took his Hallah from this [Kab] on its own and that [Kab] on its own.

Mishnah 6

נוטל אדם כדי חלה – [A person] who wishes to knead a few batches of dough of impure doubtfully-tithed [dough -for Hallah], he can establish their Hallah from pure dough whose Hallah had not yet been dedicated, and that it will be this particularly batch of ritually pure dough that will be established for Hallah on all the dough that he will need from the ritually impure doubtfully-tithed [dough- for Hallah].
עד שתסרח – this particular batch of dough and that it won’t be appropriate for human consumption, for regarding doubtfully tithed produce, the Rabbis were lenient [to permit] dedication from something pure [to fulfill the liability] on that which is impure and from that which is not nearby. And they (i.e., the Rabbis) were also lenient to dedicate from that which was of poor quality [to fulfill the liability] on something that was good, and the Hallah of doubtfully-tithed [dough] is that grai which a person buys from an ignoramus who feeds it to the poor and to troops on the march, as it is taught in the Mishnah (Tractate Demai, Chapter 3, Mishnah 1): “We feed the poor Demai produce and the .troops on the march Demai produce.” But the Hallah that we separate from it is Hallah of doubtfully-tithed dough.

Mishnah 7

סוריא – lands that [King] David conquered, and lack the sanctity like the sanctity of the Land of Israel.
רבי אליעזר מחייב – he holds that they made Syria like the Land of Israel with regard to Tithes and Seventh Year produce.
ורבן גמליאל פוטר – since he holds that they did not make Syria like the Land of Israel. And he is not liable for Tithes in Syria other than at the time when the land belongs to an Israelite and the heathen has no portion in it.
ר"ג אומר שתי חלות בסוריא – In the manner that they separate two Hallot loaves outside the Land [of Israel], one is burnt because it is ritually impure with the defilement of the lands of the nations (i.e., heathens), and the second is given to the Kohen in order that the law of Hallah from an Israelite should not be forgotten.
ר' אליעזר אומר חלה אחת – Rabbi Eliezer according to his reasoning who said that they made Syria like the Land of Israel and its dust does not defile like the dust of the land of the heathens. Therefore, one Hallah [only] and not more than this.
אחזו קולו של רבן גמליאל – who exempts Syria from Tithes and Seventh-year produce.
וקולו של ר' אליעזר – who says that in Syria [only] one Hallah [is necessary]. And we hold hat he who acts according to the lenient opinion of this master and the lenient opinion of that master is [considered] wicked. Therefore, they retracted to act like Rabban Gamaliel in two matters – that Syria is not like the Land of Israel – either with regard to Tithes and Seventh-year produce when the heathen has a share in the land and not in regard to Hallah, and such is the Halakha.

Mishnah 8

שלש ארצות – are divided in the law of Hallah
מא"י ועד כזיב – that is to say, all of the Land of Israel until K’ziv, which is a strip that goes out from Acre to the northern side, and those who came up from Babylonia conquered it and sanctified it for a second time.
מפרישים חלה אחת – and it is given to the Kohen who eats it in ritual purity.
מכזיב ועד הנהר – to the eastern side and from K’ziv until Amanah on the western side. And it is not really the Land of Israel, since it was conquered by those who came up from Egypt but it was not conquered by those who came up from Babylonia, and the first sanctification was not sanctified for the time to come.
מפרישין שתי חלות – The first is burned because it is ritually impure with the defilement of the land of the heathen nations, and since those who came up from Babylonia did not capture it, the second [Hallah] is eaten, since the defilement of the first Hallah is not well-known, for it is not completely in the land of the heathens. But, if they would not separate the second Hallah which is consumed, they (i.e., people) will say that pure Terumah was burned, but when they separate the second Hallah and it is eaten, one who sees this will place upon his heart to understand the reason for the matter, or ask the Sages and they will inform him.
של אור יש לה שיעור – because this land was already holy. This appears like the Hallah of the Torah, therefore, he would separate according to the [appropriate] measure that they separate from a ritually impure dough, one out of twenty-four or [one] out of forty-eight.
ושל כהן אין לה שיעור – because this is from the words (i.e., teachings) of the Scribes/Sofrim.
ומן הנהר ומן אמנה ולפנים – that is to say, from the beginning of the river and inward from it, and similarly, from the beginning of Amanah and inward from it, which is actually outside the Land [of Israel], and we separate two Hallot and both of them are from the words of the Scribes.
אחת לאור – which is ritually impure with the impurity actually of the land of the heathens.
ואחת לכהן – in order that the Torah of Hallah not be forgotten when it is given to the Kohen.
של אור אין לה שיעור – for since both of them are from the words of the Scribes, it is better to increase with that which we give to the Kohen that is eaten and not with what is burned.
וטבול יום אוכלה – to the Hallah that is thrown into the fire belongs to outside the land of Israel. And the person who has bathed in the day time (but must wait for sunset to be perfectly clean – see Leviticus 22:7 and Mishnah T’vul Yom, Chapter 1, Mishnah 1), that is spoken of here is the Kohen who immersed for his nocturnal pollution, for the Hallah that is to be burnt in fire of outside the Land [of Israel] is not prohibited to him, other than to someone whose ritual impurity comes out upon him from his body, but someone who is impure in other impurities is permitted to eat it. Therefore, where outside of the Land [of Israel] there is a minor-age Kohen who had ever seen a nocturnal emission in his life, or the High Priest in years that immersed for his nocturnal emission, we separate one Hallah alone and give it to the Kohen. But if there is no minor-age Kohen, or a Kohen who immersed for a nocturnal emission , but there is a Kohen to whom a pollution happened, we separate two Hallot, one for the fire and it has no fixed measure, and one for the Kohen and it has a fixed measure, one out of forty-eight, according to the law of all dough that was defiled by accident. For the defilement of the land of the heathens is one that is unavoidable (i.e., by accident), and the Kohen eats it while a pollution happened, in order that the Torah of Hallah not be forgotten from Israel.
אינו צריך טבילה – And someone to whom a pollution happened is permitted [to eat] the Hallah of outside the Land of Israel. Bu the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yosi.
ואסורה לזבים ולזבות – The Rabbis stated this, for had Rabbi Yosi permitted this for those men and women afflicted with gonorrhea, in order that it would be permitted to those whom a pollution occurred.
ונאכלת עם הזר על השלחן – and we don’t decree that placing it on the table is on account of eating.
ונתנה לכל כהן – whether to a Kohen who is a Haver/who observes the Levitical laws in daily intercourse or a Kohen who is an ignoramus, such Maimonides has explained. But the approach of the Talmud does not prove this, but rather, whether [we are dealing with] a Kohen who eats his non-sacred food in ritual purity or a Kohen who does not eat his non-sacred food in ritual purity, but we do not give any gift from the gifts of the priesthood to any ignoramus , as it is written (II Chronicles 31:4): “[He ordered the people, the inhabitants of Jerusalem] to deliver the portions of the priests and Levites, so that they might devote themselves to the Teaching of the LORD.” We do not give a portion other than Kohanim who devote themselves to the Torah of God, and similar, that which is taught in the Mishnah further on (Mishnah 9), these are given to every Kohen, [but] not to a Kohen who is an ignoramus, but to every Kohen, even though he does not eat his non-sacred food in ritual purity.

Mishnah 9

החרמים – for the Kohanim, as it is written (Numbers 18:14): “Everything that has been proscribed in Israel (see also Leviticus 27:28) shall be yours.”
והבכורות – if he is unblemished, there are the holy things of the Temple, but if he is blemished, it is written (Deuteronomy 12:15): “…The unclean and the clean alike may partake of it, [as of the gazelle and the deer].”
ופדיון פטר חמור – you redeem it with a lamb and it has no sanctity.
ראשית הגז – as it is written (Deuteronomy 18:4): “You shall also give him [the first fruits of your new grain and wine and oil,] and the first shearing of your sheep.”
ושמן שרפה – oil from the priest’s due that was deilved.
וקדשי מקדש – for they did not prohibit giving to the Kohen that which he was not careful about in its ritual impurity, but rather a thing which has a prohibition of defilement in the areas outside the Temple and Jerusalem, such as Terumah/priest’s due and the tithe-of-the-tithe (which the Levite gives to the Kohen from the one-tenth that he received from an Israelite) and Hallah, but the sanctified things of the Temple and Firstlings which he brings them to the Temple Court, they did not suspect, for he would [first] purify himself.
ור' יהודה אוסר בבכורים – for he was suspect that perhaps he would not be careful with them, since the Divine Service is not performed with them. But the Halakha is not according to Rabbi Yehuda.
ר"ע מתיר – for Rabbi Akiba follows his own reasoning, as he stated in the second chapter of Maaser Sheni (Mishnah 4) that [regarding] vetches/horse-beans – anything done with them is done in a state of uncleanness.
וחכמים אוסרים – for they think that it is food, since is eaten in the years of famine. And the Halakha is according to the Sages.

Mishnah 10

מביתר – name of a place outside the Land of Israel
ולא קבלו ממנו – to eat them is impossible, for they were defiled in the land of the heathens, and to burn them, is impossible since their ritual impurity is unknown, lest people say that we say sacred pure produce of the priest that was burned, and to return them to their places is impossible so that people don’t say that Terumah went out from the Land of Israel to outside the Land of Israel, but rather, we leave them until the eve of Passover and burn them [as part of the Hametz that is burned].
וחג הקציר בכורי מעשיך – for the two loaves are called Bikkurim/First Fruits, and we permit the [consumption of the] new [grain] in the Temple.

Mishnah 11

העלה בכורות מבבל ולא קבלו ממנו – as it is written (Deuteronomy 14:23): “You shall consume the tithes of your new grain and wine and oil, and the firstlings of your herds and flocks, in the presence of the LORD your God….”From the place that you bring the tithes of your new grain, you bring firstlings. From outside the Land of Israel where you do not bring the tithe of new grain, you do not bring firstlings.
הביא בכורי יין ושמן ולא קבלו ממני – because the did not cut them from the beginning of this, for had he cut them from the beginning of this, they would have been permitted, and such is taught in the Mishnah in the last chapter of Terumot (Chapter 11, Mishnah 3): “They do not bring first fruits in the form of liquid except for that which is produced from olives and grapes.”
פסח קטן – The Second Passover (see Numbers, Chapter 9, verses 1-15), and his children were small (i.e., minors) and only on the First Passover are they obligated (i.e. 14 Nisan) , for everyone is obligated in appearing [before God], as it is written (Exodus 23:17): “[Three times a year] all your males shall appear [before the Sovereign, the LORD],” but not on the Second Passover.
מאפמיא – we read it such, and it is the name of a place in Syria.
כקונה בפרוורי ירושלים – the fields of Jerusalem and the villages surrounding it. It is the translation of the open space outside of a place called Parva (name of a Persian building and magian – from whom a compartment in the Temple was supposed to have been named – see Mishnah Middot, Chapter 5, Mishnah 3).