Mishnah Oktzin
משנה עוקצים
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Mishnah_Oktzin
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org
-Open Mishna
-http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Mishnah

Chapter 1

Any part of a fruit that can serve as a handle but does not protect the fruit is both susceptible to impurity and can transfer impurity, but it is not included with the rest of the fruit to be considered for the minimal egg size.  If it does protect the fruit, even if it does not serve as a handle it is susceptible to impurity and can transfer impurity and it is counted as part of the minimal egg size.  If it neither protects nor serves as a handle it is not susceptible to impurity nor can it transfer impurity.
"Roots of garlic, onion, and leeks: when they are moist, their stem: whether moist or dry, and the column which is next to the food; the roots of lettuce, radish and turnip [combine for the minimal egg size]," the words of Rabbi Meir.  Rabbi Yehudah says, "The big roots of radishes, combine [for the minimal egg size], but its fibers, does not combine [for the minimal egg size]."  Roots of mint,  rue, field vegetables, garden vegetables which are uprooted to replant, and the stalks of grain, and their husks  - Rabbi Elazar says even the cobweb-like waste covering - all of these ar susceptible to impurity and can transfer impurity and combine [for the minimal egg size].
The following can become impure, and can make other things impure but do not combine.  The roots of garlic, onion and leek when they are dry and their stems at the place where there is no food against them, and the handle of a grape vine a fistful on either side, the handle of a cluster of grapes, in any amount and the tail of a cluster of grapes that became exposed [through the removal of grapes] and four fistfuls of the handle of the date palm, and the three fistfuls of an ear of grain and three fistfuls of all handles of things that are cut, and whatever is not usually cut, even a minute amount of their handles or roots, and the bristles of an ear of grain these things can become impure, and can make other things impure but do not combine.
The following neither defile nor can they be defiled nor do they join together: 
The roots of cabbage-stalks, 
Young shoots of beet growing out of the root, and [the same with] turnips,
[And produce whose roots] that are normally cut off but were pulled up [with their roots]. 
Rabbi Yose declares them all susceptible to impurity, but he declares insusceptible to impurity cabbage-stalks and turnips. 

"Handles" of all foods that he threshed on the threshing-floor are clean.
Rabbi Yose declares them unclean. 
A sprig of a vine the he stripped is clean.
If he left one grape on it, it is unclean. 
A twig of a date that they stripped is clean.
If he left one date on it, it is unclean.
The same with beans: if they stripped the twigs it is clean. 
But if he left one bean pod, it is unclean. 
Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah declares [the stalk] of the broad bean clean, but declares unclean the stalk of other beans, since he desires its use. 

Stems of figs and dried figs, klusim, and carobs both defile and can be defiled and join together. 
Rabbi Yose says: also the stem of a gourd.
Stems of pears and krutumelin pears, quinces, and crab-apples, the stem of the gourd if it is a handbreadth and the stem of the artichoke if it is one handbreadth. 
Rabbi Elazar bar Zadok says: two handbreadths.
[All] these defile and are defiled; but they do not join together. 
And all other stems neither defile nor are they defiled.


Chapter 2

Olives which he pickled together with their leaves [the leaves] are clean, for he pickled them only for the sake of appearance.  The fibrous stuff on a zucchini and its flower on it are clean. Rabbi Judah says: as long as it is still before the merchant, it is unclean. 
All pits (or pips) defile and are defiled but do not join together. The pits of a fresh date, even when detached does join together. Of a dried date does not join together.  Therefore, the stem of a dried date does join together, but that of a fresh date does not join together.  A pit part of which has been detached, the part opposite the edible portion joins together.  A bone on which there is flesh, the part that is opposite to the edible part joins together.  If it had flesh only on one of its sides:  Rabbi Ishmael says: we look at it as though [the flesh] goes around it like a ring;  But the sages say: the part opposite  the edible part joins together, as for example with savory, hyssop and thyme. 
A pomegranate or melon part of which has rotted, [the rotten part] does not join together. And if it is not rotted at this end and not rotted at that end, but has rotted in the middle, [the rotten part] does not join together.  The stem of a pomegranate does join together, but its flower does not join together. Rabbi Elazar says: even the comb is clean.  
All peels defile and are defiled, and join together.  Rabbi Judah says: there are three peels for an onion: the inside one whether it is whole or whether it be pierced joins together; the middle one when it is whole joins together, but when it is pierced it does not join together; the outside one is in either case clean.    
One who chops up [produce] for cooking, even if he did not finish it up, it is not regarded as connected.  To pickle or to boil it, or to put it on the table, then it is regarded as connected.  If he began to take [the pieces] apart, the [part] of the food which he began [to take apart] is not considered connected.  Nuts that he strung together, or onions that he piled together, are regarded as connected. If he began to take the nuts apart, or to strip the onions, they are not connected.  [Shells of] nuts and almonds are regarded as connected [with the nut] until he crushes them. 
[The shell of] a roasted egg [is regarded as connected] until he cracks it. That of a hard-boiled egg until he breaks it up.  A bone that has marrow in it is regarded as connected until he breaks it up. A pomegranate that he has divided is regarded as connected until he knocks it with a stick.  Similarly, loose stitches of launderers or a garment that had been stitched together with threads of kilayim, is regarded as connected until he begins to untie them.   
The green leaves of vegetables join together. And the white ones do not join together.  Rabbi Elazar bar Zadok says: the white ones of cabbage join together because they are food.  So also of lettuces, because they preserve the food part.   
Onion leaves or the offshoots of onions, if there is moisture in them they are measured as they are; if there is empty space within them, he must squeeze their empty space together.  Spongy bread is measured as it is, but if there is empty space within it, he must squeeze its empty space together..  The flesh of a calf which had swollen, or the flesh of an old [beast] that has shrunken, are measured as they are.  
A cucumber which he planted in a pot and it grew and it went out of the pot is clean.  Rabbi Shimon said: what is its nature to make it clean? Rather, that which has already become unclean remains unclean, and only that which is pure may be eaten. 
Vessels made of dung or of earth through which the roots can penetrate, do not render the seeds susceptible to impurity.  A perforated pot does not render seeds susceptible; but if it has no hole, it does render the seeds susceptible.  What is the measure of the hole? Such that a small root can go out.  If he filled it with earth to its brim, it is like as a frame that does not have an edge. 

Chapter 3

There is that which needs to be rendered susceptible [to uncleanness] but does not need intention,  [There is that which needs] intention and needs to be rendered susceptible.  Need intention, but does not need to be rendered susceptible,  Needs neither to be rendered susceptible nor intention.  Any food that is meant for people needs to be rendered susceptible, but does not need intention.   
One that severs from a human, from a domesticated beast, from a wild animal, from bird, or from the carrion of an unclean bird, and the fat in villages. And all kinds of wild vegetables, except for truffles and mushrooms; Rabbi Judah says, except for field-leeks, purslane and ornithagolum.  And Rabbi Shimon says: except for cynara sycaria. Rabbi Yose says: except for muscari comusum.  All these need both intention and to be rendered susceptible [to uncleanness].  
Carrion of an unclean beast in all places, and of a clean bird in villages, need intention but do not need to be rendered susceptible.  Carrion of a clean beast in all places, and that of a clean bird and also forbidden fat in the market places, do not require intention or to be rendered susceptible.  Rabbi Shimon says: also [the carrion of] a camel, rabbit, hare or pig.   
The aneth stalk: once it has given its taste to a dish, it is no longer subject to the laws of terumah, and it also no longer defiles food uncleanness.  The young sprouts of hawthorn, of lapidum, or leaves of wild arum, do not defile food uncleanness until he sweetens them.  Rabbi Shimon says: also [the leaves of] the colocynth are like them.  
Costus, amomum, principal spices, crowfoot, asafoetida, pepper and lozenges made of saffron may be purchased with [second] tithe money, and they do not defile with food uncleanness, the words of Rabbi Akiva.  Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri to him: if they can be purchased with [second] tithe money, then why should they not defile with food uncleanness? And if they do not defile with food uncleanness, then they should also not be purchased with [second] tithe money? 
Unripe figs or grapes:  Rabbi Akiva says: they defile food uncleanness;  Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: once they have come to the season when they are liable to tithes.  Olives and grapes that have hardened:  Bet Shammai says: they are susceptible uncleanness,  Bet Hillel says: they are clean (insusceptible).  Black cumin:  Bet Shammai says: it is clean (insusceptible),  Bet Hillel says: it is susceptible to uncleanness.  Similarly with regard to [liability for] tithes.  
The heart of a palm is treated like wood for all matters, except that it can be purchased for [second] tithe money.  Unripened dates are food, but are exempt from tithes.   
Fish--from when do become susceptible to uncleanness?  Bet Shammai say: after they have been caught.  Bet Hillel say: after they are dead.  Rabbi Akiva says: if they can still live [they are not susceptible].  A branch of a fig tree was broken off, but it was still attached by its bark: Rabbi Judah says: it [the figs] are clean. But the sages say: [it all depends] whether [the figs] could still live.  Grain that had been uprooted, but is still attached to the soil even by the smallest of roots, is clean.   
The forbidden fat of a clean beast is not regarded as unclean with carrion uncleanness; therefore, it requires something to make it susceptible.  The forbidden fat of an unclean beast, is regarded as unclean with carrion uncleanness; therefore it does not require something to make it susceptible.  Unclean fish and unclean locusts, require intention to make them susceptible in villages. 
A bee-hive:  Rabbi Eliezer says: it is treated as if it were land; and one can write a prozbul (a document allowing debts to remain valid through the sabbatical year) through it, it is also not susceptible to uncleanness as when it is its place, and the one who removes honey from it on Shabbat is liable to a sin-offering.  But the sages say: it is not to be treated as if it were land, and one many not write a prozbul on its; it is susceptible even if it remains in its own place; and the one who removes honey from it on Shabbat is exempt [from a sin-offering].  
Honeycombs--when do they become susceptible to uncleanness because they are liquids?  Bet Shammai says: once he smokes the bees out. But Bet Hillel says: once he breaks up the honeycomb.  
Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: In the future, Hashem with apportion to every righteous person three hundred and ten worlds, as it says, (Proverbs 8:21), "To apportion to my loved ones Yesh (lit. something. The numerical value of the letters is three hundred and ten) and their store houses I will fill." Rabbi Shimon ben Chalifta said: Hashem has not found any utensil that can hold the blessing which Israel [deserves] except for peace, as it says, (Psalms 29:11) "Hashem gives strength to his nation, Hashem will bless his nation with peace."