Mishnah Oktzin
משנה עוקצים
Mishnah Yomit by Dr. Joshua Kulp
http://learn.conservativeyeshiva.org/mishnah/

Mishnah Oktzin



Chapter 1

That which serves as a handle but does not protect, both contracts uncleanness and conveys uncleanness; but it is not included. If it protects but is not a handle, it contracts and conveys uncleanness and is included. If it neither protects nor serves as a handle, it neither contracts nor conveys uncleanness.
Roots of garlic, onions or leeks that are still moist, or their top-parts, whether they are moist or dry, also the central stalk that is within the edible part, the roots of lettuce, the radish and the turnip, the words of Rabbi Meir. Rabbi Judah says: only the large roots of the radish are included, but its fibrous roots are not included. The roots of the mint, rue, wild herbs and garden herbs that have been uprooted in order to be planted elsewhere, and the spine of an ear of grain, and its husk. Rabbi Elazar says: also the earth covering of roots; All these things contract and convey impurity and are included.
The following are both defiled and defile, but do not join together [together with the rest]: Roots of garlic, onions or leeks when they are dry, the stalk that is not within the edible part, the twig of a vine a handbreadth long on either side, the stem of the cluster whatsoever be its length, the tail of the cluster bereft of grapes, the stem of the ‘broom’ of the palm-tree to a length of four handbreadths, the stalk of the ear [of grain] to a length of three handbreadths, and the stalk of all things that are cut, to the length of three handbreadths. In the case of those things not usually cut, their stalks and roots of any size whatsoever. As for the outer husks of grains, they defile and are defiled, but do not join together.
The following neither defile nor can they be defiled and they do not join together: The roots of cabbage-stalks, Young shoots of beet growing out of the root, and [similar] such turnip-heads, [And produce whose roots] that are ordinarily cut off but in this case were pulled up [with their roots]. Rabbi Yose declares them all susceptible to contract uncleanness, but he declares insusceptible cabbage-stalks and turnip-heads.
Stalks of all foods that have been threshed on the threshing-floor are clean. Rabbi Yose declares them unclean. A sprig of a vine when stripped of its grapes is clean, but if one grape alone is left on it, it is unclean. A twig of a date-tree stripped of its dates is clean, but if one date remains on it, it is unclean. Similarly, with beans, if the pods were stripped from the stem it is clean, but if even one pod alone remains, it is unclean. Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah declares [the stalk] of the broad bean clean, but declares unclean the stalk of other beans, since it is of use when [the pulse] is handled.
Stems of figs and dried figs, kelusim, and carobs are both defiled and defile, and they join together. Rabbi Yose says: also the stalks of the gourd. The stems of pears and krutumelin pears, quinces, and crab-apples, the stalks of the gourd and the artichoke [to the length of] one handbreadth. Rabbi Elazar bar Zadok says: two handbreadths; [All] these are defiled and defile; but do not join together. As for other stems, they are neither defiled nor do they defile.

Chapter 2

Leaves of olives pickled together with the olives remain clean, for their pickling was only for the sake of appearances. The fibrous substance on a zucchini and the flower-like substance on it are clean. Rabbi Judah says: that as long as it is still before the merchant, it is unclean.
All kinds of pits can be defiled and defile but do not join together. The pits of fresh dates, even when detached [from the edible part], do join together; but those of dried dates do not join together. Accordingly, the stems of dried dates do join together, but that of fresh dates do not join together. If only part of a pit is detached, then only that part near the edible portion joins together. [Similarly] with a bone on which there is flesh, only that part that is close to the edible part joins together. [If a bone] has flesh only upon one of its sides: Rabbi Ishmael says: we take it as though [the flesh] encompasses it like a ring; But the sages say: [only] that part close to the edible part is included [as is the case] for example with savory, hyssop and thyme.
If a pomegranate or melon has rotted in part, [what is rotten] does not join together. And if [the fruit] is sound at either end but has rotted in the middle, [what is rotten] does not join together. The stem of a pomegranate does join together, but the fibrous substance in it does not join together. Rabbi Eliezer says: also the comb is not susceptible to uncleanness.
All kinds of peels defile and are defiled, and join together. Rabbi Judah says: an onion has three skins: the innermost one whether it is in its entire state or whether it be pierced with holes joins together; the middle one when it is in a whole state joins together, but when it is pierced with holes does not join together; the outermost skin is in either case insusceptible to uncleanness.
If one chops up [fruit] for cooking, even if [the chopping had] not been completely finished, it is not regarded as connected. If his intention had been to pickle or to boil it, or to set it on the table, then it is regarded as connected. If he began to take [the pieces] apart, [only] that part of the food which he began to take apart is not considered connected. Nuts that had been strung together, or onions that had been piled together, count as connected. If he began to take the nuts apart, or to strip the onions, they are not connected. [Shells of] nuts and almonds are considered connected [with the edible part] until they are crushed.
[The shell of] a roasted egg [is considered connected] until it is cracked. That of a hard-boiled egg [is considered connected] until it is entirely broken up. A marrow-bone serves as connected until it is wholly crushed. A pomegranate that has been divided into sections is connected until it has been knocked with a stick. Similarly, loose stitches of laundrymen or a garment that had been stitched together with threads of kilayim, are connected until one begins to loosen them.
The [outer] leaves of vegetables: if they are green they join together, but if they have whitened they not join together. Rabbi Elazar bar Zadok says: the white leaves of cabbage join together because they are edible. So also those of lettuces, because they preserve the edible part.
Onion leaves or the offshoots of onions, if there is moisture in them they are to be measured as they are; if there is empty space within them, it must be squeezed tightly together. Spongy bread is measured as it is, but if there is empty space within it, it must be pressed firmly. The flesh of a calf which had swollen, or the flesh of an old [beast] that has shrunken in size, are measured in the condition they are in.
A cucumber planted in a pot which grew until it was out of the pot is pure. Rabbi Shimon said: what is its nature to make it clean? Rather, that which has already become unclean remains unclean, and only that which is pure can be eaten.
Vessels made of cattle dung or of earth through which the roots can penetrate, do not render the seeds susceptible. A perforated plant-pot does not render seeds susceptible; but if it has no hole, the seeds do become susceptible. What should be the hole's dimension? Such that a small root can push its way through. If it was filled with earth to its brim, it is deemed as a frame without an edge.

Chapter 3

Some things need to be rendered susceptible [to uncleanness] but they do not need intention, [Other things need] intention and to be rendered susceptible. [Other things] need intention, but do not need to be rendered susceptible, [And other things] need neither to be rendered susceptible nor intention. Any food that is meant for people need to be rendered susceptible, but does not need intention.
That which has been severed from a human, beast, wild animal, bird, or from the carrion of an unclean bird, and the fat in villages. And all kinds of wild vegetables, except for truffles and mushrooms; Rabbi Judah says, except for field-leeks, purslane and ornithagolum. And Rabbi Shimon says: except for cynara sycaria. Rabbi Yose says: except for muscari comusum. Behold all these need both intention and to be rendered susceptible [to uncleanness].
The carrion of an unclean beast at all places, and of a clean bird in villages, need intention but do not need to be rendered susceptible. The carrion of a clean beast in all places, and that of a clean bird and also fat in the market places, require neither intention nor to be rendered susceptible. Rabbi Shimon says: also [the carrion of] the camel, rabbit, hare or pig.
The aneth stalk after having given its taste to a dish is no longer subject to the laws of terumah, and also no longer imparts food uncleanness. The young sprouts of hawthorn, of lapidum, or leaves of the wild arum, do not impart food uncleanness until they are sweetened. Rabbi Shimon says: also [the leaves of] the colocynth are like them.
Costus, amomum, principal spices, [roots of] crowfoot, asafoetida, pepper and lozenges made of saffron may be bought with tithe money, but they do not convey food uncleanness, the words of Rabbi Akiva. Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri to him: if they may be bought with [second] tithe money, then why should they not impart food uncleanness? And if they do not impart food uncleanness, then they should also not be bought with [second] tithe money?
Unripe figs or grapes: Rabbi Akiva says: they convey food uncleanness; Rabbi Yohanan ben Nuri says: [this is only] when they have reached the season when they are liable to tithes. Olives and grapes that have hardened: Bet Shammai says: they are susceptible to uncleanness, Bet Hillel says: they are insusceptible. Black cumin: Bet Shammai says: is not susceptible, Bet Hillel says: it is susceptible. Similarly [they dispute with regard to their liability to] tithes.
The heart of a palm is like wood in every respect, except that it may be bought for [second] tithe money. Unripened dates are considered food, but are exempt from tithes.
When do fish become susceptible to uncleanness? Bet Shammai say: after they have been caught. Bet Hillel say: only after they are dead. Rabbi Akiva says: if they can still live. If a branch of a fig tree was broken off, but it was still attached by its bark: Rabbi Judah says: [the fruit] is still not susceptible to uncleanness. But the sages say: [it all depends] whether they could still live. Grain that had been uprooted, but is still attached to the soil even by the smallest of roots, is not susceptible to uncleanness.
The fat [of the carcass] of a clean beast is not regarded as unclean with carrion uncleanness; for this reason it must first be made susceptible. The fat of an unclean beast, however, is regarded as unclean with carrion uncleanness; for this reason it need not be made at first susceptible. As for unclean fish and unclean locusts, intention is required in villages.
A bee-hive: Rabbi Eliezer says: it is treated as if it were land; and one can write a prozbul on it security, it is also not susceptible to uncleanness as long as it remains in its own place, and the one who scrapes honey from it on Shabbat is liable to a sin-offering. But the sages say: it is not to be treated as if it were land, and one many not write a prozbul on its security; it is susceptible even if it remains in its own place; and the one who scrapes honey from it on Shabbat is exempt [from a sin-offering].
When do honeycombs become susceptible to uncleanness on account of their being regarded as liquids? Bet Shammai says: from the moment he begins to smoke the bees out. But Bet Hillel says: once he breaks up the honeycomb.
Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi said: In the world to come the Holy One, Blessed be He, will make each righteous person inherit three hundred and ten worlds, for it is written: "That I may cause those that love me to inherit yesh (numerical value of; and that I may fill their treasuries" (Proverbs 8:21. Rabbi Shimon ben Halafta said: the Holy One, Blessed be He, found no vessel that could contain blessing for Israel save that of peace, as it is written: "The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord will bless his people with peace" (Psalms 29:11).