Mishnah Oktzin
משנה עוקצים
Open Mishnah
http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Mishnah

Mishnah Oktzin



Chapter 1

Any part of a fruit that can serve as a handle but does not protect the fruit is both susceptible to impurity and can transfer impurity, but it is not included with the rest of the fruit to be considered for the minimal egg size.  If it does protect the fruit, even if it does not serve as a handle it is susceptible to impurity and can transfer impurity and it is counted as part of the minimal egg size.  If it neither protects nor serves as a handle it is not susceptible to impurity nor can it transfer impurity.
"Roots of garlic, onion, and leeks: when they are moist, their stem: whether moist or dry, and the column which is next to the food; the roots of lettuce, radish and turnip [combine for the minimal egg size]," the words of Rabbi Meir.  Rabbi Yehudah says, "The big roots of radishes, combine [for the minimal egg size], but its fibers, does not combine [for the minimal egg size]."  Roots of mint,  rue, field vegetables, garden vegetables which are uprooted to replant, and the stalks of grain, and their husks  - Rabbi Elazar says even the cobweb-like waste covering - all of these ar susceptible to impurity and can transfer impurity and combine [for the minimal egg size].
The following can become impure, and can make other things impure but do not combine. The roots of garlic, onion and leek when they are dry and their stems at the place where there is no food against them, and the handle of a grape vine a fistful on either side, the handle of a cluster of grapes, in any amount and the tail of a cluster of grapes that became exposed [through the removal of grapes] and four fistfuls of the handle of the date palm, and the three fistfuls of an ear of grain and three fistfuls of all handles of things that are cut, and whatever is not usually cut, even a minute amount of their handles or roots, and the bristles of an ear of grain these things can become impure, and can make other things impure but do not combine.
The following neither defile nor can they be defiled nor do they join together: The roots of cabbage-stalks, Young shoots of beet growing out of the root, and [the same with] turnips, [And produce whose roots] that are normally cut off but were pulled up [with their roots]. Rabbi Yose declares them all susceptible to impurity, but he declares insusceptible to impurity cabbage-stalks and turnips.
"Handles" of all foods that were threshed on the threshing-floor are clean. Rabbi Yose declares them unclean. A sprig of a vine the he stripped is clean. If he left one grape on it, it is unclean. A twig of a date that they stripped is clean. If he left one date on it, it is unclean. The same with beans: if they stripped the twigs it is clean. But if he left one bean pod, it is unclean. Rabbi Elazar ben Azariah declares [the stalk] of the broad bean clean, but declares unclean the stalk of other beans, since he desires its use.
Stems of figs and dried figs, klusim, and carobs both defile and can be defiled and join together. Rabbi Yose says: also the stem of a gourd. Stems of pears and krutumelin pears, quinces, and crab-apples, the stem of the gourd if it is a handbreadth and the stem of the artichoke if it is one handbreadth. Rabbi Elazar bar Zadok says: two handbreadths. [All] these defile and are defiled; but they do not join together. And all other stems neither defile nor are they defiled.