Tosefta Berakhot
תוספתא ברכות
Rabbi Mike Feuer, Jerusalem Anthology
https://www.sefaria.org

Tosefta Berakhot



Chapter 1
















Similarly (a name was returned to its original), “His tabernacle was in Shalem, and His dwelling place in Zion.” And why did the verse see fit to give her back her original name? Because it says “For this city has aroused My anger and My wrath since the day they built it until this day, to remove it from before My face,” (Jeremiah 32:31) perhaps even now she is (seen) in wrath and anger? But another verse states “…the mountain that God desired for His dwelling…” (Tehillim 68:17) behold she is cherished and desired! This teaches that her destruction brought her atonement. And from where do we learn that the Divine Presence will not return in her until she becomes a mountain (again)? It says “His Tabernacle was in Shalem…” we find that when it is whole she is called a mountain (by David before any building). But the Divine Presence will not return in her until she is made a mountain (again). It says “And Avraham called that name of that place the Lord will see, as it is said to this day: On the mountain, the Lord will be seen.” (Bereshit 22:14) And it says “Remember, O Lord, for the sons of Edom, the day of Jerusalem…” when (will the Divine Presence return)? When her foundations have been uprooted from her. “…those who say, "Raze it, raze it, down to its foundation!" (Psalms 137:7)

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

The blessing after the meal is an obligation from the Torah, as it says “And you will eat and be sated, and you shall bless the Lord, your God, for the good land He has given you.” (Devarim 8:10) ’And you will eat and be sated, and you shall bless’ this refers to the blessing after the meal. ‘the Lord, your God’ refers to the first blessing on the land. ‘the good land’ this refers to Jerusalem, as it says “…this good mountain and the Lebanon.” (Devarim 3:25) ‘He has given you’ this refers to the blessing of ‘who is good and does good.’ From where do we learn that just as one is obligated to make a blessing before eating, so too they are obligated to make one after eating? The verse says ‘He has given you,’ meaning from the moment He has given it to you. From where do we learn that we bless even on the mountains and the hills? The verse says ‘on the land.’ From where do we learn that we bless even on the Torah and the commandments? The verse says ‘He has given you,’ and it says elsewhere “…and I will give you the stone tablets…” (Shemot 24:12) R’ Meir says ‘from where do we learn that just as one blesses on the good, so too they bless on the bad? The verse says ‘the Lord, your God…has given you’ “Your God,” meaning, “your Judge.”  Bless Him for every judgement He passes on you, be it for the good or bad.