Midrash Tanchuma
מדרש תנחומא
C 2011
Melton Purposes Manual

Midrash Tanchuma



Book 1



Book 2



Book 3



Book 4



Book 5



Book 6



Book 7



Book 8



Parshah 1

One who possesses knowledge and understanding should know and understand that the life spirit of man ascends to the place from whence it came, while the animal spirit descends to the ground, as King Solomon said, “And the life-spirit returns to the God who bestowed it.” [Ecclesiastes (Kohelet) 12:7] And which life-spirit returns to the God who bestowed it? – these are the spirits of the righteous and the pious and the repentant who stand before Him in a lofty state of life unaccompanied by death and of good unaccompanied by evil... How fortunate is the man who is privileged to enjoy this pleasure and delight, God should make us worthy of enjoying this pleasure together with the righteous. The ancient Sages have already informed us that the goodness of life in Olam haBa (the World to Come) cannot be fathomed or articulated by man, and that he does not know its greatness, beauty and power, because it has neither price, nor likeness, nor shape... The Sages called it "The World to Come" not because it doesn't exist now. Rather, it is “to come” for we who are today in this world. It is, in other words, the world to come after man exits this world.
...So whoever claims that the World to Come will come into existence only after this world is destroyed, is mistaken. Rather, the righteous upon leaving this world immediately ascend to this lofty state... While [the souls] of the wicked rove all over the world never finding a resting place, and they do not ascend to their place of origin for twelve months, until the body has decayed. What does [the soul of the wicked] do? It returns again and again to its grave and endures the sight of its body rotting. To what may this be compared? To a man who had a beautiful house that collapsed. What does he do? Every day he goes and watches how thorns grow over it and cover it and that its stone fence has been destroyed, and seeing it this way he weeps and mourns for it.