Orot
אורות
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Orot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org
-YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
-http://www.torontotorah.com

Orot

Lights from Darkness

Land of Israel



Chapter 1

The land of Israel is not an external thing, an external national acquisition, a means to the goal of general unity and strengthening of the physical or even spiritual. The land of Israel is an intrinsic section of the nation, attached to it with a living bond, entwined with its existence in internal uniqueness.
It is therefore impossible to explain the uniqueness of the sanctity of the land of Israel, to actualize the depths of love for her, in any humanly rational way. It is only through the divine spirit which is on the nation as a whole, through the natural spiritual nature which exists in the soul of Israel, which spreads out through 
Contemplating the Land of Israel as an external value which serves only the purpose of uniting the ‎nation, even for the sake of enabling the Jewish idea in exile, guarding its form, strengthening faith ‎and reverence and strengthening practical mitzvot in their proper form, does not produce durable ‎fruit. This foundation is rotten, compared to the sacred strength of the Land of Israel. True ‎strengthening of the Jewish idea in exile will only come via deep embedding in the Land of Israel; ‎via yearning for the Land of Israel, [the Jewish idea] will continually receive all of its independent ‎traits.‎
Anticipating of redemption is the force which maintains Jewry in exile, and the Judaism of the Land ‎of Israel is the redemption itself…‎

Chapter 2

As man distances himself from the secrets of Torah, his understanding of the Kedusha of Eretz Yisrael becomes hazy.

We do not reject any conception or understanding [of our relationship with the Land of Israel] which is founded upon righteousness and intellectual sensitivity and awe of heaven, in any form, but only that aspect which wishes to deny the secrets and their great influence upon the national spirit. This is a disaster against which we must battle, with counsel and understanding, with sanctity and with might.


War



Israel and its Rebirth



Lights of Rebirth



Chapter 1

The most whole and sweet understanding of knowing the divine is recognizing the divine relation to the world overall and to each and every detail of its particulars, the physical and the spiritual, (it is) like the relation of the (higher) soul to the body – the spiritual side that sustains and fills the body (with the) light of persisting and flourishing, the matter necessary for life, light, and flourishing.
When this relation is filled in the heart and the psyche, it fills them with love more than fear, pleasantness of contemplation and serenity more than bitterness of trembling. 
The more refined school of thought’s cultural recognition proceeds very well in enhancing this sweet awareness.
In the life of the individual it is easy to come to this quality through practical and intellectual ethical improvement and through elevating the light of knowledge in general.
When human character relates with identification toward the exalted, toward the absolute good, in intellect and in life, immediately this (higher) soulful recognition of divinity immediately takes hold of it well, is absorbed in all of its ideas and merges with all its senses and feelings to refine them.
The group organism has a unique psychology; if, in its depth, it too will be inclined to identify with exalted morality, and love of the noble good will be well engraved in its essential nature, either according to its free-choice or according to its heritage, then this (higher) soulful recognition will also penetrate well into the innards of the nation, and the pleasantness of the love of the divine (combined) with awe of exaltedness will be sweet and proper, steeped in the whole of the nation, and will straighten all its ways.
However, according to the collective’s measure of psychological distance from affection for absolute goodness, so too the (higher) soulful relation to the divine will not be able to penetrate within it, and of necessity the connection to divinity within it will be a foreign connection, and the Lord will be to it a foreign and strange god, and this foreign god will acquire strange and caricature-like qualities that twist life much more than they can straighten it.
For now civilization has still not come to this characteristic of establishing divine identification with absolute goodness in the depth of the (higher) soul of group organisms, and therefore we still see in them signs of evil and tyranny and the essence of morality progressively fades and is abandoned from the collective heart of the groups.
But humanity has an heirloom refuge in the Congregation of Israel: identification with the divine is found in her inner circle. 
Feeling testifies and understanding clarifies that the single and unique Lord of the world is complete goodness, life, light, everything, exalted above everything, and better than every good, is good to all and His compassion is upon all His works, He sustains and watches over all, makes salvation sprout for all; and this overall identification not only permeates this nation’s individuals, but specifically (permeates) her as a collective. 
If it happened that she forgot her (higher) soul, the source of her life, she was gifted with prophecy to remind her, and exiles were prepared for her to straighten her crookedness until ultimately identification with absolute goodness would win within her.
This living tangible thirst that fills practical life, including societal and national (life), with its light and the essential strength of its existence – just as it fills them with metaphysical and visionary energies – it proceeds to pave its way, and calls to the nation at its time to be encouraged, to be uplifted, to shake off the dust of its lowliness, to break the chains of exile, and to demand new flourishing in the Land upon which the culture of the divine (higher) soul began to form, for the sake of the nation and for the sake of the entire world.
And the demand for closeness with the divine is not revealed in all its light at the beginning; just the opposite: it first appears in a negative way, in driving away the alien feelings about divinity that do not fill the psyche in relation to the (higher) soul but rather with the rule of a harsh master and a power of violence that come from the names of the baalim (an idolatry) lacking the refined light of awe of elevation and the pure and holy love of acceptance of the kingdom of heaven that is stamped on Israel, “the offspring of Abraham, my love;” and according to the strengthening of negation in the hands of those so inclined, so too progresses and comes the strength of the positive from the great camp that is like the camp of the Lord, from the heads of the people, those whose (higher) soul is from the world of Atzilut; and the divine nationalistic (higher) soulful feeling continually blossoms and connects with all the events hidden in perceptible history, which in their brilliance stand out in the subject of that history; this is the inherited Land, a desirable Land, a Land of holiness, a Land of beauty and a Land of life, “Our Redeemer, God of hosts is His name, The Holy One of Israel.”

Chapter 2

Nature finds its dominance more in human collectives than in it individuals.
Individuals are more free and the type of freedom unique to humanity is more visible in them. 
But society, human and national, is more under the influence of nature, and (the role of) instinct is more visible in it.
The ways of preservation intended for the preservation of the species and the individual, which appear in instinctive animals more than in civilized man - they are revealed in human collectives in ways closer to the animal nature. 
The inner recognition, which includes the inclination to be on guard against any threat and to recognize the enemy, without any need for wisdom or experience, is revealed in the lives of nations, religions, and races in relation to one another.
Idolatry sensed in Israel, in Judaism, its greatest enemy, such that as much it would be seen the world would be distressed by it, and from all the nations would go out instinctive hatred for Israel.
Christianity, even though it tried to separate itself from official idolatry, was nevertheless based on foundations close to idolatry. It would not have been able to permeate within the idolatrous nations, in which idolatry had penetrated the insides of their (higher) soul, their blood, and their flesh, except by taking for itself an idolatrous style for its pursuit and spreading of its style.
It knows well that if the idolatrous style padding it should melt and come to an end it would not find legitimacy in life for its unique currency and it would be forced to be absorbed into Judaism, its source; therefore, it defends itself and is full of deathly hatred toward Judaism and for Israel who uphold Judaism. And so it goes on all roads and in all situations. 
The existential war makes its way in the physical world and in the spiritual world, in the world of opinions and of ideas. With full force and inner awareness it (the existential war) teaches many groups, an uneducated multitude, to defend themselves in their spiritual position, just as it teaches this instruction to individual animals and to human collectives in their material position.
Only after these inclinations move into life and have powerful effects, do philosophers come, investigators of the psyche and the nature of nations, and reveal the wisdom of the instinctive awareness advanced by the multitude, which follows its feelings and opinion, and accordingly paves its way in life. Investigation will refine the natural inclinations and as much as possible will give them a civilized and moral form, but it will not uproot them from their place, because they are stronger than it, and justice and righteousness are by their side. For, behold, they sustain collective life, and as long as there is merit in the continued existence of the national and societal group in whatever shape it takes, it has the right to protect its existence from anything that would swallow it, and with cunning it will wage war.
With natural awareness Judaism also recognizes herself – before any philosophy or any logic explain to her what she is – the illumination of divinity in the most pure and shining form deep within her and in the world and in life overall, and fulfilling this national model according to her independent spirit in her historic homeland, this is her whole aim. Her practical systems come to do the work of the channels through which will be fulfilled the relationship of the flow of the abundance of the dew of life from the pure divine ideal to her national ideal, in spirit, intellect, and action, not only in the life of every individual, but especially in the life of the whole nation.
In the world there are pious people, philosophers, holy people, people of the Lord, but there is no nation in the world whose essential (higher) soul can only be fulfilled in accordance with the goal of the sublime divine ideal in the world, except for Israel.
She must have a different spirit than the spirits of all the nations under the heavens and a unique sustenance appropriate to her that supports her and upholds her strength and provides her existence. Accordingly, Judaism cannot only rely on the ordinary nourishment of civilization, for it does not contain within it those parts from which her spiritual body is built.
In that from a fundamental perspective she differs from the spirit of all other nations, this does not in any way nullify the human side in which she is equal to all humanity, and in this way her spiritual side requires cultural nourishment like all the spiritual nourishment of all humanity in this field. However, this nourishment will not satisfy her need for the sustenance that is unique to her.
And if you should see a foreign spirit coming to transfer her from her source of unique life and to incline her toward satisfaction with the general nourishment, and all the more so if with powerful and decisive negation that spirit would negate her nourishment that is unique for strengthening her spirit and supporting the foundation of her existence, know that an enemy has stood up against her, and with all the might of her inner strength she will defend herself.
The divine good inside her and in the world that will be revealed through her full dwelling in her Land, this is her ideal characteristic. 
Independent creation and investigation that increasingly shines are esteemed branches of this ideal characteristic of hers, but these two will only be able to reach their heights with her when her sublime spirit is protected within her according to her unique nature, which is exalted above every human creation, every investigation, and every vision of the heart, like the elevation of heaven over the earth and like the elevation of the Lord’s thoughts and ways over man’s thoughts and ways.
When she preserves the tactics that according to her character bring the nature of her spirit to health, these being of Judaism’s ways in life, in the nation overall in every official and public way and in individuals according to the way most effectively absorbed in their education and their opinions, then creativity and independent investigation will find a broad and safe expanse within her.
And as long as she is secure in her unique nourishment she will know for sure that the general sustenance will return to her for blessing, for she needs it no less than every nation, and maybe even more in proportion to her spiritual elevation.
When the impetuous come and ridicule her spirit, and maliciously kick the tactics of her life, she is shocked and knows that for her it is a time of distress.
The question as to the essence and the value of the natural recognition (behind) this distress’s thinking, understandably, cannot be answered by the multitude that feels, but rather by people of heart who understand the content of the vision. 
It (the nation) longs for the fulfillment of it nature; this fulfillment also requires independent creativity and investigation in the fullest sense; yet it sees that those destroyers that have become like outsiders; they cause her – she is forced in order to defend her unique spirit – to shutter windows against the external light of creativity and investigation that has not been completely clarified as fitting her inner spirit, because in the name of this creativity and investigation these combatants are coming to erase her likeness.
And if we would even say that we will not be able to inherit absolute victory with this way of constricted preservation alone, behold, a man will give everything he has for his life.
But those who are truly filled with a spirit of courage at a time of crisis like this must announce and explain that the tactics of the holy life – the Torah and Mitzvah – are full of the spirit of the nation and store within them the power of its life with its unique character; they are also the most certain basis for freedom of creativity and investigation as well as for the blossoming of the nation and the recognition of her ideals, her revival and her building.


Great Calling



The Process of Ideals in Israel

The Godly and the National Ideal in the Individual



The Godly and the National Ideal in Israel



Dissolution of Ideals



The Situation in Exile



The First and Second Temples; Religion



Unification of Ideals



Seeds

Thirst for the Living God



The Wise is Preferable to Prophet



The Souls of the World of Chaos



Acts of Creation



Suffering Cleanses

All the conflicts of opinion amongst people and all the internal contradictions that each individual suffers in his thoughts come only from the mental fog in one's thought of the divine, which is an endless sea and all the thoughts, whether practical or theoretical, arise from and return to.
One must always bear in mind the thought, which will be clear without the dross of false imaginations, of false fears, of bad qualities, of herds and disadvantages. The belief of God affirms human beings only as the same degree that divine greatness is explored and learned from that important part of them, which it deserves. Then the soul shines from the upper light by joining love and a complete view of life, and all feelings, opinions and actions are noted. As this fundamental element grows in the soul's innards, so too will grow the action that will act as a divine adherence to emotion and with the admiration of the heart to conduct the whole course of life in a straightforward manner.

The War of Ideas



National Soul and Body



The Value of Rebirth



Lights of Israel

The Essence of Israel



The Individual and the Collective



Connection to the Collective







7. The more a person increases in Torah and mitzvot, the more he connects with the Congregation of Israel and feels within himself the soul of the whole collective in its loftier distillation. He feels in his whole being the suffering of the Congregation of Israel in its lowliness; he revels in the eternal joy that is awaiting it; and he exults in the deep, internal knowledge of the splendor of its divine loftiness. In every joyous season of the appointed times of delight, and the temporal renewals of days and months, he is completely surrounded and full of reinforcements of strength for its happiness and joyous delight. <i>Rejoice with Jerusalem and be glad for her, All you who love her! Join in her jubilation, All you who mourned over her—That you may suck from her breast Consolation to the full, That you may draw from her bosom Glory to your delight.</i> (Isaiah 66:10-11)<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">Translation of the verses from <i>Revised JPS, 2023</i></i>.

Love of Israel



Israel and the Nations




Any false opinion which destroys the world generally comes from a root desire to rise up without boundaries and without proper preparations, something which causes falling and breaking. Idolatry desired to approach divinity physically, and fell to its depths. For it wanted to rise to a place to which it is impossible to rise. It did not acquire the necessary preparations, which are the ways of knowledge and feeling, which prepare one to visit the chamber of the Lord [alluding to Psalms 27:4]. The veering away from the original line, from the source of Israel, always has a trace of idolatry, the desire and action of describing divinity with an assertion of absolute recognition. It is only [feasible through] the revelation of divinity by way of the trait of our teacher Moses' great modesty, peace be upon him, that taught him that [it is characterized by the phrases,] since no man may see Me and live, and you may not see My face [alluding to Exodus 33:20]. This is the greatest elevation of the human need to know God: To know the knowable part and the impossibility of its completion, such that, through this, the elevation that is in it, through the parts that are revealed through man's abilities, will always be the impetus for the most sublime culture. Christianity thought that it knew God. It measured the immeasurable according to the measure of human morality, according to the measure that it could understand when [Christianity] originated. And from its fantasy that it had knowledge about what it and every creature has no concept of, and the sensibility for what it is impossible to sense, it naturally drew close to idolatry. So it became so entangled in concepts that are so idolatrous that it cannot be cleansed of them without a total breakdown of its essence, which will be a negation of its form and the return of its good parts to the source from which they were taken, which is the treasure of the Torah and the light of Israel. That which Christianity is in relationship to kindness and morality, through which it thought that it knew and sensed divinity, Islam is in relationship to wisdom and might, through which it thought that it knew the essence of divinity and upon which it built its foundation. However, wisdom and might hold the conception in the heart more forcefully than kindness and morality, which soften it and bring it to turn its face in every direction. Hence Islam is better able to keep its distance from idolatry, and it does not give favor to the sensibility in the heart that through the use of images, symbols, and weak ideas, it would be able to find the softness that it desires. Nevertheless, [Islam] is not able to make a permanent stand, such that there is no conceptual divide between it and idolatry. For the divinity that is built and recognized by a created measure, such as wisdom and might, and all types of virtues like these, from that which the mouth and the heart of limited man can speak or think, is itself a characteristic of idolatry, because of its falsehood and lack of reality. So it will always be vanquished by negating denial, which will be more correct when we compare the two to the true concept of divinity. For absence and negation are ultimately subjective to man and, in that sense, are true. As everything that man grasps, evaluates, and understands by way of assertion is null and void of the truth of divinity. As limitation and void are things that characterize human concepts more than then [these concepts can] sustain themselves from the essence of being and existence. For in the existence of the creatures, [human perceptions] are only because of the effect of divinity and not from the angle of [reality] itself. Hence the foundation of the knowledge of God that stands forever is [a concept of] divinity that rises above any understanding and sensibility. It is one which is sealed with an understanding and a sensibility that is sealed with humility and [recognizes the] impossibility of comprehension. And it is specifically from this angle that its impact on life is great. This straightens them and always raises them forever. And the totality of all life, and all free movements in the spiritual and physical worlds, in the world of the individual and the world of the community find their roles specifically in it. However, for an entire nation to be able to be sustained by such fine and refined spiritual nourishment as this in the internality of its soul, it requires very great preparation, preparation that is communal, moral, and historic. And all of these were only perfected by the community of Israel. <i>Surely they are My people, children who will not play false; so He was their Deliverer</i> (Isaiah 63:8).

Nationhood of Israel



Israel's Soul and its Rebirth



Preciousness of Israel



Holiness of Israel

