Sermons Unto My People
דרשות אל עמי
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Sermons_Unto_My_People
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Sermons Unto My People

Introduction



The High Holidays



The Three Festivals



Chanuka, Purim, and Special Shabbatot



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9









































































































Even though it appears as if the assimilationists and the nationalists are completely opposed to each other, there is nevertheless a point of agreement between them, as previously mentioned.
And this also has to do with the negation of the exile, since they both agree about this, though it is for different reasons and calculations.
Both do not understand and cannot fathom how it is possible for exile and redemption to coexist. Hence they both come to an approach that negates the exile. However the first, the assimilationists, explain this by ignoring the redemption: When we stop dreaming about the land of Israel and all of the Jews in all of the lands of their dispersion will think of the lands of their dispersion as their lands, better when the Jews will be gone from the world and there will only be Frenchmen of the Mosaic faith, Germans of the Mosaic faith, Poles of the Mosaic faith, and so forth, then behold, we will automatically not be in exile. Whereas the latter, the modern nationalists, explain this by ignoring all the expressions of exile. In their opinion, there is a need to pass an eraser over all of Jewry's spiritual creations during the exile. To call a wave of forgetfulness for assistance to make us forget any remnants of the exile, from the days of the destruction of the land until now. And then when we can be freed from all of the remnants of the exile, we will merit the redemption speedily and in our days.
Both of them are mistaken in their vision. Just like it is impossible to deny the redemption, which is one of the essential ideas of Judaism, so too is it impossible to deny the exile, meaning to throw away all of Judaism's spiritual creations during its exile. For we did not stop giving birth, even in the days of our exile; and we are not considered a barren woman even then. So the sages, may their memory be blessed, have already said (Pesachim 87b), "The Holy One, blessed be He, was charitable towards the Jewish people, since he dispersed them among the nations." 

Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14




Amalek: the symbol of militarism 
Even a superficial reading shows Amalek to be the symbol of militarism for whom the sword serves not only as a means but also as the purpose of life, or, rather, the entire content of his life. These are people who go to war not out of necessity, when they have no other choice, but rather as if going to a dance. Only in war do find a place where they can show off and highlight their power and being. 













“The Eternal will be at war with Amalek in all generations” and in the words of the Sages, “The sword and the book descended from heaven intertwined” (Devarim Rabbah 4: 2). Amalek was granted a greater share of the sword than other peoples; and Israel of the book, and one can only be built from the destruction of the other. When one is ascendant, the other falls; therefore there is a perpetual war between Israel and Amalek.
Write this as a memorial in a book
What means do we use to fight the Amalekites and all masters of the sword? How can we think to put an end to militarism in the world? After all, in our day, with our own eyes we have seen a “commanded” war of that type, The Great War that fought under the banner of “a war to end all wars.” The consequences of this war are all too well known to everyone. 
Indeed, under Jewish procedural law, the prosecutor can become an advocate, evil cannot be uprooted from the world using evil itself, we cannot remove terror from the world by using terrorism on the other side, and therefore we do not fight a mighty arm with a mighty arm, or the sword with a sword. 
When Judaism declared war on militarism, it was not through militarism, rather “the ETERNAL said to Moses, “write this as a memorial in the book.” 
This means that the war against the sword is [fought] by the book.
The book of paper and parchment will endure longer than all the swords made from many kinds of metal, it will defeat all the swords and cannon tools in the world, all will be beaten and scattered to the wind, and the book shall reign alone. 

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24




The Holiday of Eliyahu (Elijah) the Prophet
The holiday of Passover is the holiday of Eliyahu the Prophet in particular. When we, God willing, will sit at the Seder in another few days, we will see the cup of Eliyahu before us. The door will open, and the honorable Eliyahu himself will come in as we greet him with, welcome! Then he hears our gut-wrenching and heart-breaking prayer, "Pour your wrath upon the nations that did not know You and upon the kingdoms that did not call upon Your Name! Since they have consumed Yaakov and laid waste his habitation (Psalms 79:6-7), etc." And it is not only the holiday of Passover, but rather also Shabbat Hagadol (the Shabbat before Passover) that is dedicated to Eliyahu the prophet. So in that day's haftara, we speak only about him. But why. 
It is simple that it is because it is impossible for the salvation to come without outstanding self sacrifice, without a special holy enthusiasm to which nothing else in the world can compare. 