Ma'amar Tzipita LeYeshuah
מאמר צפית לישועה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ma'amar Tzipita LeYeshuah



Chapter 1

Behold! Because of our abundant sins, we see that religious observance has decreased extremely in many places; and the sons depart in their youth from God's Torah. It was not so in any previous years. After properly investigating the cause of the matter, we find many reasons. Its main cause is the weakening of [religious] belief; for it is the belief in the Eternal World (i.e. the World to Come), reward and punishment, the coming of the Messiah, and all the established principles of the Torah, which has given might to Israel in every generation to bear all their straits and troubles, and to stand on behalf of their religion, with self-sacrifice of themselves or their sons. Due to their fear of Him, it was preferable for a father to see his son slaughtered before his eyes as a martyr (lit. for sanctification of [God's] Name), returning his soul in purity to the God of Heaven (cf. Jonah 1:9); rather than see him, on account of wealth, pervert his way from the path of the Torah and its commandments.
Indeed, nowadays, because of our abundant sins, Satan's plot has succeeded, through his many (unwitting) agents, in weakening the ''roots'' of our [religious] beliefs in the mists of Israel, whether in [belief] in reward and punishment or principles of the Prophets. As we perceive the magnitude of the straits and troubles that pass upon us every day, it appears to ourselves (lit. souls) that the Holy One, blessed is He, has completely hidden His presence (lit. face) from us; and we despair from the Redemption, and we don't anticipate for ''Heavenly Kingship'' at all. Each individual turns to himself and seeks strategies, whether permissible [religious uses] or prohibited [religious uses] how to finance himself and his household.
Even more than this, even the complete and upright, who fear G-d with great fear; when they see the abundant, throwing off of the ''yoke'' [of heaven]. That it happens in our abundance of sins, leniency in many instances, in matters of extreme severity. For example, matters [of] which the Torah has obligated (in the absence of proper performance) death and excommunication (from G-d). [For instance, Sabbath desecration, as it is written (Exodus 31:14) "A desecrator will surely die", and sexual immorality which includes women in their menstruating cycle; as it says in Parshat Achrei Mot] Their heart has ''fallen'' within themselves, and they wonder (lit. calculate) how it is possible to hope in our generation for ''heavenly mercy'' after they have annulled the Torah of G-d in such an astonishing matter like this, and through this, it comes out that even a [resolve] to fix men who are able to save themselves from the ''descent of destruction'' (i.e. purgatory), has been completely weakened. Therefore, I found it an obligation upon myself, to arrange before all, the truth of the matter.
That, on the contrary! In our times it is even more logical (lit. closer) to await salvation! Although it would seem [otherwise] when one scrutinizes the [necessary] conditions for the end redemption [found] in Parshat Netzavim (cf. Deuteronomy 30:2-5), "It will be when you return to G-d. To listen to His voice, in all the commandments that I have commanded you; with all your hearts and with all your soul, we and our sons, then G-d our G-d will return his captives" etc. As it is clear there. According to what we perceive in our time, our generation is not qualified at all. According to what we have written above, this would seem to give credence to despair [on salvation]. However, the answer to this is as we will clarify [later on]...
Behold! This (i.e. the Verses in Parshat Netzavim) would seem a challenge to our Rabbi's (lit. wise ones) may their memory be for a blessing, who passed down to us in the Mishnah and Talmud, the signs of the redemption. Signs that aren't positive (lit. bountiful) at all. As we say in the Mishnah at the end of [tractate] Sotah (9:15)  and in [tractate] Sanhedrin (97a), "During the era directly preceding (lit. on the heels of) the messiah, brazenness will increase", etc. "There will be no reproof. Young children will whiten (i.e. embarrass) the face of elders. Elders will stand before children. Children will make detestable their fathers. Daughter will arise [against] mother, and daughter-in-law with her mother-in-law. The enemy of man will be his own household", etc. More so, "The wisdom of the scribes will [run] unrestrained. Fearers of sin will be despised, and the truth will be missing".
In Sanhedrin (97a) it is stated that, "It will be made missing, missing continuously". Meaning that the truth will be missing from the world daily in a very great ''flooding''. Furthermore, there, the ''son of David'' (i.e. the messiah) won't come until...  "multiply do the slanderers". As well as many similar statements. Many of them are based on statements of [the] Torah and Prophets.
We see in our great sins, that many have been [already] fulfilled in this generation. [As well as all other matters regarding straits, all have been completed] This would seem to be a shock, for was is not seemingly the opposite [as seen] from the verses in the Torah?! That the redemption will be when "we return to G-d"; as it is written (Deut. ibid) "It will be when he will bring upon you... the blessing and the curse, and you will return to G-d your G-d, and you will listen to his voice... Then G-d will return His captives", etc. This is a promise from G-d, that will certainly occur, as writes the Ramban. 
Behold! There are many [possible] answers to clarify the matter. (See Sanhedrin 97b-98a) However, the closest simple explanation is this:  That [in reality], both are true. In the [period preceding the] end redemption, there will be two types of men, and both will help in bringing close the redemption; as we will clarify.
For we find a portion of Jewish men who strengthen themselves to serve G-d with all their hearts and all their souls; them and their sons. They are the complete ones of faith in Israel; servants of G-d in this generation. For in a time that the ''breachers'' (i.e. Maskilim and similar groups) stand to breach and destroy the holy religion, through means of increasing books of heresy; which they scatter in the mists of the nation, or other strategies of desire and coveting. [They are] messengers of the Evil Inclination; the means to cause a throwing [off] of the yoke of heavenly kingship, the yoke of Torah, and the yoke of [divine] service.  In these times, the remnants of those of complete faith in Israel, who strengthen and empower [themselves] to guard all the statutes of the Torah; in order not to weaken from it. Also their sons, they (the fathers) teach them to strengthen [themselves] in the Torah of G-d; and not to excise from any of the verses, right or left.
Certainly, their level [of divine service] rises above [to the heavens]. For they labor in the matter with great want and improvement [lit. ''sharpening''] of the soul; greatly more so than earlier generations. Take into account that which is stated in Avot D'Rav Nathan, "One time with hardship is equivalent to one hundred times without hardship''. The service of G-d, Blessed is He, in these times, is pure and clean; without any goal for honor or other ambitions. For, on the contrary, [they] have sustained [despite] our abundant sins; removed from [spiritual] bad, considered mad by the populace (cf. Isaiah 59:15), G-d fearers are despised compared next to all [different] types of men.
There are men, in order to make their sons proper orthodox Jews, accept upon themselves to live a life of poverty and hardship all their days, and separate a portion of their wages for [their son's Torah] teachers, in order to strengthen their sons in the Torah of G-d. They [also] don't change their residence to ''distant places'' (i.e. America) because livelihood is commonly found there, despite their poverty and hardships; [all] in order to educate their sons in Torah and fear [of G-d]. Certainly, it is possible to say that this is considered a return to G-d, with all heart and soul.
These remaining sons, to whom G-d calls to the heavens, "[their] nights [are] like days'' [immersed] in the Torah of G-d. They ''blacken'' their faces in hardship from [lack of] sustenance. Only wanting to cleave to God's Torah and Its commandments; with all their deliverance and desire. In a time where there are abundant hindrances and obstacles, they strengthen themselves to stand in their safeguarding; a holy safeguarding of Torah, and of [divine] service. All that is written in Moses' Torah and the words of the prophets, is holy before (lit. next) them. Is their [spiritual] level not rising very high above at this time?!
These sons,  young unmarried ones of Israel, and in the straits of time that pass over them, strengthen themselves to guard Judaism with all their capabilities! They work on themselves to live with bitter bread and ''oppressed'' (i.e. sour) water. Only in order that they won't have non-kosher enter (lit. within) their mouths. It is a time of hunger, thirst, and weariness. Not just one or two days, but rather many days and years. Despite their poverty, they don't rebel (lit. kick)! G-d forbid! Rather their souls ''melt'' on their meager amount of Torah and G-d's commandments; which is not in their hands to do adequately. Is this not a return to G-d?! With all their heart and soul?! For their servitude to G-d is a complete service; each one of their merits is very important.
In the same vein (lit. ''as it goes out''), we see the holiness of the nation of Israel; even though the straits of time have vastly increased on everyone, nonetheless, they have strengthened with all their soul to guard the statutes of the Torah, them and their sons. They come and pray, cry, and confess, before G-d, blessed is He.  From their righteousness, they judge and establish times to [learn] Torah. Despite all their poverty and hardship, they are increasing to mercy, and do [acts of] kindness; one with his fellow. In all, they endeavor and edify how to comprehend and do good to the needy!
On all these people it is certainly proper to say, they are fulfilling the verses of the Torah, "It will be when comes upon you all these matters, the blessing and the curse, which I have given before you...and return with your heart", etc. "And you will hear his voice, in all that I command of you today; you and your sons, with all your heart and with all your soul". For these are the remaining Jews of the complete faith. Returners of heart, and knowers of the seriousness of [divine] service, and its commandments, which is upon them.  They and their sons are self-sacrificing to keep the Torah.
However, the Rabbis (lit. "wise ones") already from the beginning also related this to us. [That] Not everyone stands at such a [spiritual] level (as discussed above), and arisen has a new generation that is the opposite of the first, they stand at an extremely lowly level as far as religious observance, and each conducts himself as he pleases (lit. upright in his eyes). [and they don't accept reproof, as is clear in the Mishnah]. Nonetheless, one shouldn't lose (lit. fall) heart because of this, for this in and of itself is a sign of the imminent messiah.
The prior group will bring the redemption closer with their good deeds and these (i.e. the second group) will similarly bring it closer. The people of those earlier generations conducted their lives properly and lived lives of Torah and Mitzvot, and all of Israel were steadfast in their faith. Fathers bequeathed to their children the foundations of belief and the laws, and these children embraced with love and affection everything their fathers taught them. 

Chapter 2

And behold it is known by all that the sin of anyone who does not believe in the coming of the Messiah at all is too great to bear. For he is missing one of the thirteen principles [of faith]. And likewise, someone who does not await his arrival - meaning someone who gives up on him for any reason whatsoever - is the first one's fellow and is considered a denier of the Torah (a heretic). For [these are the words] of the Rambam in the [Mishneh Torah,] Laws of Kings, Chapter 11: The King Messiah will arise and re-establish the monarchy of David as it was in former times. He will build the Sanctuary and gather in the dispersed of Israel. All the earlier statutes will be restored as they once were. Sacrifices will be offered, the Sabbatical and Jubilee years will be observed, as commanded in the Torah. Anyone who does not believe in him or one who does not await his arrival (perforce he means to say, that he gives up on him for any reason whatsoever) not only denies the Prophets, but also the Torah and Moses our teacher. For the Torah has given testimony about him saying, “And the Lord your God will return your captivity and have compassion with you. He will return and gather you… If any of you should be dispersed at the ends of Heaven, from there He will gather you... And the Lord your God will bring you to the land...” (Deut. 30:3-4). To here [are his words].