Mishneh Torah, Prayer and the Priestly Blessing
משנה תורה, הלכות תפילה וברכת כהנים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Prayer and the Priestly Blessing



Chapter 1

It is a positive commandment to pray every day, as it is written: "You shall serve the Lord your God" (Ex. 23:25).  By tradition, they learned that this service is prayer, as it says: "and to worship God with all of your heart" (Deut. 11:13)—the sages said what is worship of the heart? This is prayer.  The number of prayers is not biblical, the form of prayer is not biblical, and prayer has no biblically fixed time.
Therefore, women and slaves are obligated in prayer because it is a positive commandment lacking a fixed time, but the obligation of this commandment is as follows: a person should supplicate and pray every day and relate the praise of God, and afterwards ask for their needs as a request and a supplication, and afterwards give praise and thanks to God for the good that has been bestowed upon them, each person according to their ability.
If one is accustomed/fluent, he increases in supplications and petitions, and if one has uncircumcised lips, he speaks according to his ability and anytime he likes. And so, the number of prayers is as each to their own abilities. There are some who pray once a day, and there are those who pray many times. And everyone would pray facing the Temple. And this was the way of things from the time of Moses to Ezra. 
When Israel was dispersed in the days of Nebudchadnezzar the evil, they were in foreign lands and they had children in the foreign lands and their children spoke babble. And everyone’s language was this one and this one and languages were very mixed. And since the speaker was not able to speak all, they needed one language, rather that they should be confused. As it is said: “And half their children spoke in the language of Ashdod, etc” [Nehemiah 13:24]. And none knew how to speak “Yehudit” and spoke the language of the people. And because of this, when one prayed, his tongue was shortened to ask for his needs, or to give praise to the HKBH in the holy language until that their tongues were mixed up. And when Ezra and his Beit Din saw this was, they rose and instituted for themselves the 18 blessings in the order of three first praises to HaShem, and three last thanksgivings, and the middle there were in them requests on all the things that are like the foundations of every person’s desires/needs, man to man. And the needs of the community should be set in the mouths of all and they will learn them. And there will be a prayer, even the stutterers will pray wholly like the prayers of the smooth talkers, because this matter was set, all the blessings and prayers were ordered in the mouths of all Israel so that the whole matter was set in the mouths of the stutterer. 
And so, they decreed that the number of prayers should be like the number of offerings: two prayers each day, corresponding to the two continual offerings. And for every day that has an additional offering, they decreed a third prayer, corresponding to the additional offering. And the prayer that corresponds to the morning continual offering is called "the dawn prayer," the prayer that corresponds to the afternoon continual offering is called "the gift prayer," and the prayer that corresponds to the additional offerings is called "the additional offerings prayer."
And so, they decreed that a person pray one prayer at night, as the limbs of the afternoon continual offering would continue to be consumed all night. As it says (Leviticus 6:2), "it is that which goeth up ...," along the lines of what it says (Psalms 55:18): "Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I complain, and moan; And He hath heard my voice." But the evening prayer is not obligatory like the dawn and gift prayers, but even so, all of Israel, in all of their places of residence, are accustomed to pray the evening prayer, and they accepted it upon themselves like an obligatory prayer.
They also established a prayer after the afternoon prayer, just before sunset, only on the day of the fast [of Yom Kippur], in order to increase in pleading and supplication on account of the fast. This prayer is known as <i>Ne'ila</i> ("closing"), that is, [it refers to] the closing gates of Heaven as the sun sets, since it is only ever recited just before sunset. 
In conclusion, we now have three daily prayers, <i>Aravit, Shacharit and Mincha</i>, and on Shabbat and festivals we have four - the three daily prayers and the additional <i>Mussaf</i> prayer. On Yom Kippur we have five - the four aforementioned prayers and the concluding <i>Ne'ila</i>. 
One may not subtract from this [number of] prayers, but if one wishes, one may add to them. One can even pray all day long, if one so desires. These additional prayers are comparable to voluntary sacrifices [offered at the Temple], and one must therefore make an innovation in each of the middle blessings [of the Amidah], paraphrasing the [original] blessing. Even if one makes an innovation in a single blessing, this is sufficient to show that it is a voluntary prayer, rather than an obligatory one. Yet the first three and last three [blessings] are never added to or subtracted from, and nothing in them is to be changed. 
A voluntary prayer may not be recited by a community, just as the voluntary sacrifice was never a public one. Similarly, an individual may not pray the Mussaf prayer twice, once to fulfil his obligation and the other voluntarily, since the Mussaf sacrifice was not offered voluntarily. In addition, some of the Geonim ruled that additional prayers were not to be recited on Shabbat and festivals, since voluntary sacrifices were not offered on those days, but rather only the obligated offerings of that day. 

Chapter 2

In the days of Rabban Gamliel, the number of heretics increased in Israel and they caused trouble to Israel and incited people away from [service of] God. And when he saw that this [problem] was larger than all other needs of the people, he and his court established a blessing in which there is a request before God to destroy the heretic, and they added it to the prayers so that everyone would be fluent in it. With this addition, the number of blessings in the prayer [amida] is 19.
At every prayer each day, one says nineteen blessings in the proper order. When does this apply? When one can concentrate properly and is able to read at a brisk pace. However if one was distracted or pressed, or if he had trouble speaking, he should say the first three blessings, and one in the middle with elements of all the middle blessings, and the three blessings at the end and he fulfills his obligation. 
And this is the blessing that they established with elements of all the middle blessings: Grant us understanding, Lord our God, to know Your ways, and sensitize our hearts so that we may revere You, and forgive us so that we may be redeemed, and keep us far from our suffering, and satisfy us with the pastures of Your land, and gather our scattered [people] from the four [corners of the earth], and those who go astray shall be judged according to Your will, and raise Your hand against the wicked, and may the righteous rejoice in the rebuilding of Your city, and the restoration of Your Sanctuary, and in the flourishing of Your servant David, and in establishing a light for Your Messiah, son of Yishai. Before we call, may You answer, as it says (Isiah 65:24) 'And it shall be that before they call I will answer, while they are still talking I will listen', for you answer at all times, redeem and save from every trouble. Blessed are You, Lord, Who listens to prayer.
When does this apply? During the summer. But during the winter, one may not say "grant us understanding" since we need to pray for rain during the blessing for sustenance. And also after the sabbath or festivals, one may not say "grant us understanding" since we need to say havdalah in the blessing of "you grant us wisdom".
And on Shabbat and holidays, there are seven blessings in each and every one of the four prayers of the day. Three at the beginning, and three at the end, and one in the middle which contains elements of the day.  On Shabbat the middle blessing ends with "who sanctifies the sabbath". On the festivals it ends with "who sanctifies Israel and the festivals." And if it is both shabbat and a festival, it ends with "who sanctifies the sabbath, and Israel, and the festivals." On Rosh Hashanah it ends with "King of the universe, who sanctifies Israel and the day of remembrance." And if it was also the sabbath, it ends with "King of the universe, who sanctifies the sabbath and Israel and the day of remembrance."
When does this apply? At the evening, morning, and afternoon prayers. But at the Musaf prayer on Rosh Hashana, one says nine blessings: the first three and last three the same as every day, and three middle blessings. The first of the middle blessings describes kingship, the second remembrances, and the third shofar. And each of these ends with a blessing relating to its topic.
On Yom Kippur every one of the five prayers has seven blessings. The first three and last three and one in the middle relating to the day. And [the middle blessing] in every one of the prayers ends "King of the universe, who sanctifies Israel and the day of atonement". And if it falls on shabbat, it ends "King of the universe, who sanctifies the sabbath and Israel and the day of atonement"
When does this apply? On the fast day of a every year, except on the fast day of the jubilee year the musaf prayer as nine blessings, like the mufar prayer on Rosh Hashana, and they are they same blessings, not less and not more, and we only say these prayers during the times when we observe the jubilee. 
At every prayer we begin prior to the first blessing with "God, open my lips and my mouth will declare your praises" (psalms 51:17). And when one finishes after prayer say "May the words of my mouth etc. find favor before you..." (psalms 19:15). And afterward take steps backward.
On Rosh Chodesh and on the intermediate days of a festival [Chol HaMoed] one prays the evening, morning and afternoon prayers with nineteen blessings like the rest of the days, but adds in [the blessing of temple] service "Our Lord and Lord of our fathers, may it rise up and come before you etc." And in Musaf of the intermediate festival days pray Musaf like on the festival. And [for Musaf] on Rosh Chodesh one says seven blessings: the first three and the last three, and one in the middle relating to the sacrifices of Rosh Chodesh, and ends the blessing with "who sanctifies Israel and new months".
When shabbat falls in Chol HaMoed, and also when Rosh Chodesh is on shabbat, one says the seven blessings of shabbat like normal at the evening, morning, and afternoon prayers, but adds "Our Lord and Lord of our fathers, may it rise up and come before you etc." in [the blessing of temple] service. And in Musaf one begins the middle blessing on the topic of shabbat, and finishes with shabbat, and says the holiness of the day in the middle of the blessing, and ends with the new month, "who sanctifies the sabbath and Israel and new months". And on Chol HaMoed one ends the same way one ends on the festivals that fall on shabbat. 
When a festival falls on Sunday, then in the evening prayer one adds in the fourth blessing "You have made known to us Your righteous judgements and You taught us to perform Your desired laws, and you have given us, God our Lord the holiness of the sabbath, and the honor of the seasons and the festival offerings; You separated between the holiness of the sabbath and the holiness of the holidays, and You sanctified the seventh day more than the six days of work (and you separated and sanctified Your nation Israel in your holiness); and you gave us God our Lord designated times for happiness, festivals and seasons for rejoicing, etc."   And at the conclusion of shabbat and the conclusion of holidays all year one separates [havdala] in "you graciously [grant knowledge]", even though he says havdalah again using a cup [of wine]. 
On Chanukah and Purim, we add "for the miracles" into the blessing of thanks. On shabbat during Chanukah, one says "for the miracles" in Musaf the same way it is said in all other prayers. 
On fast days, even an individual who is fasting adds "answer us etc." in the blessing of "He who hears our prayers". And the leader of the congregation says it as a blessing on its own, between "redeem" and "heal", and ends [the standalone blessing] "He who responds in a time of trouble (and saves)." Thus he prayers twenty blessings.  On the ninth day of [the month of] Av, insert into "He who builds Jerusalem" the following: "have mercy Lord our God on us and on your people Israel and on Jerusalem your city and on the city of mourning etc."
In the winter [lit. the days of rain] say in the second blessing "He who causes rain to fall", and in the summer "He who causes dew to fall". When does one say "He who causes rain to fall"? Beginning at the musaf prayer on the last day of the festival [Sukkot], and ending at the morning prayer on the first day of the festival of Pesach. And starting with the Musaf prayer on the first day of of Pesach one says "He who causes dew to fall".
Beginning with the seventh day of the month of Marcheshvan, we ask for rain in the blessing of sustenance for as long as we mention the rain [in the first blessing]. Where does this apply? In Israel. But in Shin'ar, Syria, Egypt, and places near or similar to them, we ask for rain beginning sixty days after the autumnal equinox. 
In places where they needed to ask for rain in the summer, such as distant islands in the sea, they can ask for rain in the blessing of Shomeah Tefillah. In the places where two days of Yom Tov are observed, the prayer for rain is said during the additional prayer (Mussaf) of the first  yom tov. 
All year one ends the third blessing with "the Holy Lord" and the twelfth blessing with "The King Who loves righteousness and justice". But during the ten days between Rosh HaShanah until the end of Yom Kippur, one ends the third blessing "The Holy King" and the twelfth blessing "The King of Justice".
During these ten days, some places have the custom to add "remember us for life etc." in the first blessing, and in the second blessing add "who is like you compassionate Father etc.". And in the blessing of thanks, "remember your kindness etc.", and in the last blessing "in the book of life etc."  And there are places where the custom is to add during these ten days in the third blessing "And so, place Your fear, and so etc."  But on Rosh HaShana and Yom Kippur the custom everywhere is to add in the third blessing "And so, place your fear etc."

Chapter 3

The mitzvah of the morning prayer is to begin at sunrise, and its time extends until the end of the fourth hour which is one third of the day. And if one transgressed or erred and prayed after the fourth hour but before midday, one fulfilled the obligation of prayer. However, one did not fulfill the obligation of prayer in its proper time. Since just as prayer is a commandment from the Torah, so too it is a rabbinic commandment to pray at the proper time, as instituted by the sages and prophets.
We already stated that the time for the Mincha prayer corresponds to the daily (tamid) afternoon offering. And since the afternoon tamid offering was offered each day at nine-and-a-half hours [into the day], they established the time [for mincha] beginning at nine-and-a-half hours, and this time is called Mincha Ketana [lit. small mincha]. And since on the eve of Passover, if it falls on Friday, they would slaughter the Tamid at six-and-a-half hours, they said that one who prays after six-and-a-half hours fulfills one's obligation. And once this time arrives the obligation to pray begins. This time is called Mincha Gedolah [lit. big mincha].
May people have the custom to pray (minchah) gedolah and ketanah, and one of them is only optional. (Meaning pray twice, one fulfilling an obligation, the other optional). Some of the Geonim taught that it is best to make the optional prayer during minchah Gedolah, because that time slot was allowed due to a circumstance that doesn't occurs everyday.  However, if one does pray during minchah Gedolah as his obligatory prayer, then he should only pray during minchah ketanah the optional prayer. 
...See and learn that the time for Minchah Gedolah is from six and a half hours until nine and half hours. The time for mincha ketanah is from nine and a half hours until an hour and a quarter left in the day. There is the right for one to pray mincha up until sunset. 
The time for the Musaf prayer is after the morning prayer and until the seventh hour of the day. And one who prays Musaf after seven hours, even though this is negligent, one fulfills one's obligation since the time [for Musaf] lasts all day.
The evening prayer, even though it is not obligatory, for one who prays the time is from the beginning of the night until dawn. And the time for the Neilah prayer is that one should try to complete it close to sunset.




If one had the choice between two tefillot, Mincha and Musaf, one should pray Mincha first and then Musaf. But there are those who advise not to do this in communal prayer so that people do not err.

Chapter 4

Prayer is suspended for five matters, even if the proper time for prayer has arrived: clean hands; covered loins; a clean environment for prayer; matters that would make one feel rushed; and inner mindfulness.


All who are ritually impure need merely to wash their hands as if they were ritually pure, and then pray [the Amidah]; even though they would have been able to immerse in a mikveh and leave their impure state, this doesn’t prevent [prayer].  We have already explained how Ezra decreed that a ba’al keri [one who has had a seminal emission] is the only one prohibited from studying Torah until he immerses, and how later courts decreed this even for prayer, i.e. that a ba’al keri should not pray before immersing - not because of issues relating to ritual purity, but so that scholars not be found around their wives like roosters, and this is why they decreed immersion only for the ba’al keri, taking him out of the category of the rest of those who are impure.



A clean environment for prayer: You should not pray in a filthy place, nor in a bathhouse, nor in an outhouse, nor in a dung heap, and not in a place of dubious cleanliness until you’ve checked it out. The general rule is that all the places you must avoid when saying the Sh’ma, you should also avoid in prayer: just as you need to distance yourself from feces and urine and bad smells and a corpse and from seeing someone’s nakedness during the Sh’ma, so too during the Amidah.

Things that make one feel rushed: if you need to go to the bathroom, you shouldn’t pray, and anyone who prays while needing to go - such prayer is an abomination, and you should go back and repeat the prayer after having relieved yourself.  But if you would have been able to hold it in for the amount of time needed to walk a parsah [about 2 miles], then your prayer counts. Even so, before the fact, you should not pray until you have checked very carefully to see if you need to go, and have coughed up any phlegm, and wiped spittle from your mouth, and attended to anything else bothering you - only then should you pray.
One who burps, yawns or sneezes during his prayer, if he does so willingly, this is degrading, and if he checked himself it is considered like nothing. If some spittle comes up during his ravening he should wipe it with his Tallis or his clothes, and if it bothers him he should throw it behind him so it does not bother him during the tefillah and become distracted. If a person passes gas unwillingly he should wait until the smell dissipates before continuing. 

If you were standing in prayer and you dribbled a bit of urine on your legs, you should wait until the urine stops, and then resume where you left off in the prayer.  But if you had to wait so long that you could have finished the whole prayer, you should start again from the beginning.

Inner mindfulness: how does one attain it? Any prayer for which one is not fully mindful is not considered prayer.  And if one prays without mindfulness, one must go back and pray [again, this time] with mindfulness.  One who is confused or inwardly agitated is forbidden from praying until he settles himself; thus, one who has come in from traveling and is tired or unsettled is forbidden from praying until he settles himself.  The sages used to say that he ought to wait for three days until he has rested and his emotions have cooled, and only afterward may he pray.
How is intent (achieved)?  A person should turn his heart from all thoughts and envision himself as if he is standing before the presence of God.  Therefore he must sit a while before prayer in order to direct his heart and then he can pray with ease and supplications.  And he should not treat his prayer like one who is carrying a burden and throws it down and moves on.  Therefore he must sit a while after prayer and then take leave.  The early pious individuals would wait an hour before prayer and an hour after prayer and would draw out their prayer for an hour.

Similarly, one should not stand to pray amidst jollity, or frivolity, or banter, and not amidst an argument or anger, but rather amidst words of Torah.  And not amidst a judicial decision, even though that be words of Torah, so that your heart not be troubled by the ruling, but rather amidst words of Torah which do not require great concentration, for instance laws that are clear and decided. 

Chapter 5





How must one dress [for prayer]? One begins by making himself smart and honourable, as it says "Bow to the Eternal in honourable holiness". One may not stand in prayer in his underwear, and not with a bare head, and not with bare feet - in such a place where one would not stand barefoot before nobility, and would wear shoes. One may not stand holding anything, not tools or money or even Tefillin or a Torah scroll, because they distract one's mind, except on Sukkot when one must hold the Lulav. If one was carrying a load on his head, and the time to pray came, if the load weighs less than 4 kavin it can be draped on one's shoulder, and if it is heavier it should be left on the ground during prayer. The custom of all sages and their disciples is to pray wrapped up.
Fix the place.  What does this mean?  One should stand in a low place and turn his face to the wall.  One needs to open windows or openings that face Jerusalem in order to prayer facing there, as it is written, "And his windows were directed toward it in his upper chamber, etc. (Daniel 6:11)."  One should fix a place for his regular prayer.  One should not pray in a ruin nor behind a synagogue, unless he turns his face toward the synagogue.  And it is forbidden to sit down next to someone praying the Amidah or to pass before him at a distance of less than four cubits.



Bowing, how is it done? The one who is praying bows five bows in each and every prayer. In the first blessing at the beginning and at the end. And in “giving thanks” at the beginning and the end. And when he finishes the prayer, he bows and then takes three steps behind him to take his leave and he says goodbye. He turns his body to the left, and afterward he turns his body to the right, and afterward he raises his head from the bow. And when he bows "4 bows" he bows during the Barukh. And he  rises up during the recitation of the Name.  And to whom does all this apply? A layman. But a High Priest, bows at the beginning and at the end of all the blessings. And a king?  Once he bows at the begining, he does not raise his head until the end of his prayer.
And why do we start saying goodbye toward the left? Because his left side is the right side of Him whom stands before/in front of him. Namely, when he stands before The King, Giving Peace to the right of the King, and afterward to the left of The King. And it was determined that when he leaves from his praying, like leaving the presence of The King..
And all of the bows, these are done by bowing until your vertebrae separate until it is like a [rain]bow [or a bow as in “bow and arrow”].
Prostrating, how is it done? After he raises his head from bowing the fifth bow, he sits on the ground and falls upon his face to the ground for Tachanun and the entire Tachanun that he wants [to say]. The Bowing referred to everywhere is upon the knees, The Qeda bow is upon the nose.  Prostration is done with the hands and legs/feet stretched out until you find yourself placed upon the ground.
When you fall upon your face after prayer, some perform the Qeda bow. And some perform the prostration bow. It is forbidden to prostrate upon hewn stones outside of the Temple, as I have explained this in Laws of the Worship of the Stars.  And an important man should not fall his face upon the ground unless he is sure that he is as holy as Yehoshu'a. But instead he should lower his face but not place it on the ground. It is permitted for a person to pray in one location and to fall upon his face in another location.
The custom is straightforward in all of Israel (i.e. the entire Jewish people). That they do not fall on their face [or possibly "That they do not offer Taḥanun (prayers of supplication)"] during Sabbaths, Festivals, Rosh Hashanna, New Moons, Ḥanukkah or Purim. Nor during afternoon prayers leading up to Sabbath eves, nor afternoon prayers leading to the eves of Holy Days, nor for evening prayers on any day. However, there are those who do fall on their faces during evening prayers. [It is] only on the Day of Atonement that one falls on his face for all of the prayers since it is a day of supplications, requests, and fasts.

Chapter 6





......

Women, slaves, and children are obligated to pray, but any man who is exempt from reading the Shema is exempt from prayer as well. Anyone in a funeral procession, whether strictly necessary or not, is exempt from prayer.

A person may not interrupt his prayer (amidah) except where there is danger for life. Even if a king of Israel would greet one, one does not return his greeting; but one interrupts (one's prayer) for a non-Israelite king, because he might otherwise become murderous. Someone who was standing in prayer and notices a non-Israelite king or a tyrant approaching should shorten one's prayer. If one is unable to do so - one may stop.  And likewise if one notices snakes and scorpions approaching, if they come in a place where it would be fatal, one stops and flees; and if it wouldn't be fatal, one doesn't stop.
Women, slaves and minors are obligated to pray. Ever person who is exempt from reciting the Shema is exempt from the Amida; and all those who escort the dead [for burial], even if they are not needed to carry the coffin, are exempt from the Amida. 

Chapter 7

When the sages established these words of prayer, they also established other blessings to recite every day and these are them: When a person gets into his bed to sleep at night he should recite the blessing: Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who brings down the cords of sleep upon my eyes, and who lowers the sleep of slumber and who awakens the pupil of the eye. May it be the will in front of You, Lord, my God, that You will save me from the evil impulse and from an evil encounter, and that evil dreams not bewilder me, and [also] not evil musings; and that my bed will be perfect in front of You; and that You will raise me up from it for life and peace; and that You will light up my eyes, lest [I sleep] the sleep of death. Blessed are You Lord, Who lights up the entire world with His glory.
And [then] he recites the first section of the Reading of the Shema and he sleeps, and even if his wife is with him (he reads the first verse or verses of mercy and afterwards sleeps). And if sleep overcomes him, he [can] even read [only] the first verse or verses of mercy and afterwards sleep.
At the time when he arises at the end of his sleep, he recites the blessing - and he is still in bed - like this: My God, the soul that You have given into me is pure. You created it, Your formed it and You blew it into me, and You preserve it inside me; and in the future, You will take it from me, and in the future, You will return it to me - in the future to come. All the time that the soul is hovering within me, I thank in front of You, Lord, my God, Master of all works. Blessed are You, Lord, Who returns souls to dead corpses.
When he hears the voice of the roosters, he recites the blessing: Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who has given understanding to the rooster to distinguish between day and night. When he puts on his clothes, he recites the blessing: Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who clothes the naked. When he puts his cloak on his head, he recites the blessing: Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who crowns Israel with splendor. When he passes his hands onto his eyes, he recites the blessing: Who opens [the eyes of] the blind. When he sits on his bed, he recites the blessing: Who unties the bound. When he puts his feet down from the bed and places them on the ground, he recites the blessing: Who floats the ground upon the waters. When he stands, he recites the blessing: Who straightens the bent. When he washes his hands, he recites the blessing: Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us about the washing of the hands. When he washes his face, he recites the blessing: Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who removes the cords of sleep from my eyes and the slumber from my eyelids. May it be the will in front of You, Lord, my God, that You will accustom me to a commanded thing and not accustom me to a sinful thing and [to] iniquity. And may the good impulse rule in me and may the evil impulse not rule in me. And strengthen me in Your commandments and place my portion in Your Torah; and give me grace, kindness and mercy in Your eyes and in the eyes of all that see me. And grant me good kindnesses. Blessed are You, Lord, Who grants good kindnesses.
And every time that he enters the restroom; before he enters, he says, Be honored, honored ones, holy ones, servants of the Highest One. Help me, help me, watch me, watch me, wait for me until I go in and come out, as this is the way of people. And after he exits he recites the blessing: Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who has created man with wisdom, and has created in him many holes and many tubes. It is revealed and known in front of Your throne of glory, that if one of them is closed or if one of them is opened, it is impossible to exist even one hour. Blessed are You, Lord, Who heals all flesh and acts wondrously.
When he puts on his belt, he recites the blessing: Who girds Israel with strength. When he puts on his shoes, he recites the blessing: That You have made for me all of what I need.When he goes to leave onto the road, he recites the blessing: Who prepares the steps of  a man. And a man should recite these blessings every day: Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who has not made me a gentile; Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who has not made me a woman; Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who has not made me a slave.
These eighteen blessing do not have an order, but rather he recites each one of them upon the thing that the blessing is for at its time. How is this? Behold, [if] he put on his belt and he is in his bed, he should recite the blessing, "Who has girded Israel with strength." [If] he heard the voice of a rooster, he should recite the blessing, "Who has given understanding to to the rooster." And he should not recite any of these blessings that he is not obligated in.      
How is this? [If] he slept in his cloak, when he rises, he does not recite the blessing, "Who clothes the naked." [If] he walked barefoot, he does not recite the blessing, "That You have made for me all of what I need." On Yom Kippur and the 9th of Av when there is no washing, he does not recite the blessing, "about the washing of the hands," nor the blessing, "Who removes the cords of sleep." If he does not enter the restroom, he does not recite the blessing, "Who has created man." And so [too] with all the others of these blessings.
The people in most of our cities have become accustomed to recite these blessings, one after the other, in the synagogue - whether they are obligated in them or whether they are not obligated in them. And this is a mistake and it is not appropriate to do so - and one should not recite a blessing unless he is obligated in it.
One who rises early to read from the Torah before he recites the reading of the Shema - whether from the written Torah or from the oral Torah - washes his hands first and says three blessings and afterwards reads.  And these are they: Who has sanctified us with His commandments and commanded us about the words of Torah.  And may the Lord our God please make sweet the words of Your Torah in our mouths and in the mouths of Your nation the entire House of Israel.  And may we and our offspring and the offspring of Your nation be those who know Your name and those involved in Torah.  Blessed are You, Lord, who teaches Torah to His nation Israel.  Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who chose us from all the nations and gave us His Torah.  Blessed are you Lord, giver of the Torah. 
A man is obligated to recite these three blessings every day and afterwards he reads a few words of Torah. And [to fulfill this], the people have become accustomed to read the Priestly blessing (Numbers 6:22-27). And there are some places that read, "'Command the Children of Israel[...]" (Numbers 28:1-9) and there are places that they read both of them and read chapters or laws from the Mishnah and from the Bereitot.
And the sages praised one who reads canticles from the book of Psalms, from "The Praise of David" (Psalms 145) to the end of the book on every single day. And [people] have already become accustomed to reading verses before them and after them. And they decreed a blessing before the canticles and that is "Blessed is the One Who spoke," and a blessing after them and that is "Praised (<i>Yishtabach</i>)." And afterwards, he recites the blessing over the reading of the Shema and recites the reading of the Shema.
There are places in which they have become accustomed on every day after they recite the blessing, <i>Yishtabach</i> to read the Song at the Sea (Exodus 14:30-15:26) and afterwards recite the blessing over the Shema. And there are places where they read the Haazinu Song (Deuteronomy 32:1-43) and there are some individuals that read both of them. Everything [here] is according to the custom.
A man is obligated to recite one hundred blessings over the course of the day and the night. And what are these one hundred blessings? Twenty-three blessings that we counted in this chapter; and seven blessing of the reading of the Shema in the morning and in the evening - before it and after it; and when he wraps himself with fringes (<i>tsitsit</i>), he recites the blessing, "Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who has commanded us with His commandments and commanded us to wrap ourselves with <i>tsitsit</i>"; and when he wears tefillin, he recites the blessing, "Blessed are You, Lord, our God, King of the Universe, Who has commanded us with His commandments and commanded us to put down tefillin"; and three prayers, in which each of the prayers there are eighteen blessings - behold, eighty-six blessings. And when he eats two meals - of the day and the night - he recites fourteen [additional] blessings, seven at each meal: one when he washes his hands at the beginning; and over the food - one at the beginning and three at the end; and over the wine - before it and after it; behold, seven blessings.  With all [of them], behold there are one hundred blessings. 
At this time when [the sages already] ordained the blessing on the heretics in the prayer and added "Who is good and does good" in the Grace over the Meal, there are found to be five additional blessings. On Shabbat and on Holidays when the prayer is [only made up of] seven blessings, and so [too] if he is not obligated on other days in all of these blessings - for example, [if] he did not sleep the whole night and he did not remove his belt and he did not enter the restroom and similar to these - he is required to complete the hundred blessings from [blessings on] the fruits.
How is this? He eats a little vegetable and blesses before it and after it and goes back and eats a little from a particular fruit and he blesses before it and after it; and he counts up all the blessings until he completes the hundred blessings every day.
The order of prayers is like this: In the morning, a man rises early and recites these blessings and reads the canticles and he recites the blessing before them and after them; and he reads the Shema afterwards and he recites the blessings before it and after it - and he skips the Sanctification (<i>Kedushah</i>) in the first blessing before it, as an individual (someone praying alone) does not say <i>Kedushah</i>; and when he finishes "Who saved Israel," he immediately stands up in order 'to make proximate the salvation and the prayer,' and he prays standing - as we said; and when he finishes, he sits and falls on his face and supplicates and [then] raises his head and supplicates a little - and he sits for the words of supplications; and afterwards he reads "The Praise of David" (sitting down) and supplicates according to his ability, and [then] leaves to his activities.
And in the afternoon (<i>mincha</i>) prayer, he begins by reading "The Praise of David" (sitting down); and afterward prays the afternoon prayer; and when he finishes, he sits and falls on his face and supplicates and [then] raises his head and supplicates a little according to his ability, and [then] leaves to his activities. And in the evening prayer, he recites the reading of the Shema and he recites the blessings before it and after it; and [then] he makes 'proximate the salvation and the prayer,' and he prays standing; and when he finishes, he sits a little and leaves. And one who supplicates after the evening prayer, behold, that is praiseworthy. And even though he recites the blessing, "lay us down (<i>hashkiveinu</i>)" after "Who saved Israel," it is not an interruption between 'the salvation and the prayer'; as both [of these blessings] are [considered] like one long blessing.  

Chapter 8

Communal prayer is always heard, even if there are sinners in their midst, the Holy One does not reject the prayer of the many, therefore a person needs to join himself with the congregation and not pray as an individual whenever one is able to pray with the community.  And a person should always be at the synagogue in the early morning and in the evening because his prayer will not be heard at all times except in the synagogue.  And every person that has a synagogue in his city and does not pray there with the community is called a bad neighbor.



And similarly, one does not make the blessing of the Sh'ma and everyone listens and answers "amen" after him other than with ten, and this is what is called "dividing the Sh'ma". And we do not say Kaddish other than with ten. And the priests do not lift their hands other than with ten. And the priests are part of the count. And [this is because] any ten out of Israel are called a "congregation", as was said, "How long shall I bear this evil congregation..." (Numbers 14:27). And there were ten in that behold Joshua and Caleb were excluded.



The leader of the congregation fulfills the obligation of the public. How? At the time that he prays and they listen and answer "amen" after each and every blessing, behold it is as if they are praying. In what case is this? When one does not know how to pray; but the one who knows does not fulfill his obligation other than with his own prayer.

We do not appoint a leader of the congregation other than one who is great in the congregation in his wisdom and in his deeds. And if he is old, behold this is extremely praiseworthy. And we make an effort to have as leader of the congregation one who has a pleasant voice and is used to reading. And one who does not have a full beard, despite that he is a great scholar may not be leader of the congregation because of the honor of the congregation, but he may divide the Sh'ma from the time he grows two hairs after thirteen years [of age]. 
And similarly, one who is inarticulate, for example one who reads an ayin for an aleph or and aleph for an ayin or any one the cannot pronounce the letters in their established manner we do not appoint him leader of the congregation. And a rabbi may appoint one of his students to pray before him in the congregation. A blind person may divide the Sh'ma and can be made leader of the congregation, but someone whose shoulders are uncovered, even though he may divide the Sh'ma, he may not be made leader of the congregation for the Prayer [i.e. Amidah] until he is covered.

Chapter 9







Someone who says in the appeals, "He who had mercy on the nest of a bird, that one may not take the mother on the children, or that one may not slaughter [an animal] and its son on one day, He should have mercy on us," and the like, we silence him, for the commandments are decrees of the Scripture, and are not mercies. For if they were due to mercy, He would not have allowed us to slaughter at all. Similarly, he should not say many nicknames of  the Name, and say, "The Powerful, the Great, the Mighty, and the Awesome, and the Strong, and the Brave, and the Staunch," for there is no power in a human to reach the end in his life. Rather, he should say what our Teacher, Moses, may he rest in peace, said.

Chapter 10








If one erred during the rainy season and said neither "Who causes the rain to fall" nor "Who causes dew to fall", one should return to the beginning [of amida]. If one mentioned dew one does not return [to the beginning]. If one erred in the summer and said "Who causes rain to fall" one starts over. If one did not mention the dew he does not start over, since dew does not stop and does not need supplication.
If one forgot to ask [for rain] in the blessing of sustenance: if one remembered prior to [the blessing of] "Who hears our prayers" one asks for rain in "Who hears our prayers"; if one remembered after "Who hears our prayers", return to the blessing of sustenance; if one did not remember until after finishing all of ones prayers, return to the beginning [of amida] and pray again.

Chapter 11

Any place in which there are ten from Israel needs to establish a house that they can enter into for prayer at every time of prayer, and this place is called a "house of assembly" [i.e. synagogue]. And the members of the city may compel each other to build a synagogue for themselves and to buy a Torah scroll, [books of the] Prophets and Writings for themselves.



Synagogues and houses of study - one behaves with respect in them and sweeps them and sprinkles them. All Israel in Spain, the west, Shinar [i.e. Babylonia], and the land of the deer [i.e. Israel] light lamps in the synagogues and unfold mats on the ground in order to sit on them. And in the cities of Edom [i.e. Christian Europe] they sit in it on chairs.
Synagogues and houses of study - we do not behave frivolously in them, for example: joking around, making fun, or empty conversation. And we do not eat in them, we do not drink in them, we do not benefit from them, and we do not stroll in them. And we do not enter them in the sun because of the sun or in the rain because of the rain. But scholars and their students are permitted to eat and to drink in them out of need.   
And we do not calculate accounts in them other than if they are accounts for a commandment, for example proceeds for tzedakah or redeeming captives, and similar cases. And we do not eulogize in them other than a eulogy for the public, for example, there would be a eulogy there for the great ones of the scholars of that city since the entire people would gather and come because of them.

Chapter 12

Moses our teacher instituted for the Jewish people, that they should read from the Torah publicly on the Sabbath, on Monday and on Thursday mornings, so that three days will not pass without the Jewish people hearing Torah. Ezra instituted that the Torah should also be read during afternoon prayers on the Sabbath because of shopkeepers [who miss weekday readings-Rashi].  He also instituted that on Monday and Thursday, three people should [be called up to] read, and that they should not read fewer than ten verses in total.
And these are those days on which we read from the Torah publicly: on Sabbaths, on Festivals, on New Moons, on fast days, on Chanukkah, on Purim, and on Monday and Thursday of every week. And we do not conclude with [a reading from] the Prophets other than on Sabbaths, Festivals and the 9th of Av alone.
We do not read from the Torah with less than ten adult, free men. And they do not read less that ten verses. "And G-d spoke [to Moses]" counts as one of the ten.  No fewer than three men shall read.  One should not conclude less than three verses from the end of a passage.  Each reader should not read less than three verses.





When the reader begins to read in the Torah, it is forbidden to speak even of a matter of halakha [law]; rather, everyone listens and remains silent, and pays attention to what he reads, as was said, "and the entire people listened to the book of the Torah" (Nehemiah 8:3). And it is forbidden to go out from the synagogue at the time that the reader reads, but permitted to go out between person and person. And whoever continuously occupies himself in Torah and Torah is his occupation: it is permitted for him to occupy himself in study of Torah at the time that the reader is reading the Torah.
From the days of Ezra it has been the practice that there would be a translator there translating for the people what the reader reads from the Torah so that they will understand the subject of the words. And the reader reads one verse only and is quiet until the translator translated it, and [then] he returns and reads a second verse. And the reader does not have permission to read for the translator more than one verse [at a time].





How many are these readers? On the Sabbath in the morning service, 7 read; and on the Day of Atonement, 6; and on holy days of Festivals, 5. We do not subtract from them, but we add to them. On New Moons,  and on ordinary days of Festivals, 4 read. On the Sabbath and the Day of Atonement in the afternoon service, on Tuesday and Thursday of every week, Chanukkah and Purim in the morning service, and on fast days in the morning and afternoon services, 3 read. We do not subtract from this number and we do not add to them.

In every single reading from these, a priest reads first and after him a Levite, and after him an Israelite. And the common practice today is that a priest who is ignorant takes precedence to read over a great scholar who is an Israelite. And any who is greater than his fellow takes precedence to read. And the last one, who rolls the Torah scroll,  receives reward equal to all, therefore even the greatest that is in the congregation goes up and completes [the reading].
If there is no priest there, an  Israelite goes up, and a Levite does not go up after him, generally. If there is no Levite, the priest who was called first returns and himself reads  a second time in place of a Levite. But one does not call another priest after him, for perhaps they will say: the first was invalid and therefore the other priest went up. And similarly, one does not call a Levite after a Levite, for perhaps they will say: one of the two of them is invalid.



It is not proper to read from chumashim in synagogues, in honor of the congregation. A Torah scroll should not be rolled [from one portion to another portion] in the presence of the congregation, because of the burden on the congregation, forcing them to remain standing while the Torah scroll is being rolled. Therefore, if it is necessary to read two separate portions, two Torah scrolls are taken out. [However,] one person should not read one portion from two Torah scrolls, lest people say that the first scroll was invalid and, therefore, they read from the second....

Chapter 13

The common practice among all Israel is that we complete the Torah in one year. We begin on the Sabbath after the Festival of Booths and read in the section of "B'reishit" ["In the Beginning"]. On the second [week], "Eileh Toldot" ["These are the generations"]. On the third week, "Vayomer, Y'Y El Avram" ["And the Lord said to Avram"]. And we go and read in this order until we complete the Torah on the Festival of Booths. And there are those who complete the Torah in three years, and this is not the common practice.























Even though a person hears the entire Torah on every Sabbath with the congregation, one is obligated to read to oneself every single week the section of that Sabbath: twice in the Bible and once in [Aramaic] translation. And a verse which has not translation, one reads it three times so that one completes his portions along with the congregation.