Mishneh Torah, Foundations of the Torah
משנה תורה, הלכות יסודי התורה
Maimonides' Mishneh Torah, edited by Philip Birnbaum, New York, 1967
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108864

Mishneh Torah, Foundations of the Torah



Chapter 1

The fundamental principle and pillar of all science is to know that there is a First Being who has brought everything that exists into being.— —



This Being is the God of the universe, the Lord of the entire world. It is he who controls the celestial sphere with a power to which there is neither end nor limit, with a power that is never interrupted. For, the celestial sphere is always revolving, and it is impossible for it to revolve without someone causing it to revolve; it is God, blessed be he, who causes it to revolve without using a hand or physical force.


It is plainly stated in the Torah and the Prophets that God is bodiless, for it is written: "The Lord is God in the heavens above and on the earth beneath" (Deuteronomy 4:39; Joshua 2:11), and no physical object can be in two places at the same time. Furthermore, it is written: "You saw no form at all" (Deuteronomy 4:15); "to whom can you liken me as an equal?" (Isaiah 40:25). If God were a physical substance he would be like other physical beings.
In view of this, what can be the meaning of the following expressions written in the Torah: "Under his feet" (Exodus 24:10); "inscribed with the finger of God" (Exodus 31:18); "the hand of the Lord" (Exodus 9:3); "the eyes of the Lord" (Genesis 38:7); "the ears of the Lord" (Numbers 11:1), and other such phrases? They are all adapted to human perception, apprehending only physical substances. The Torah speaks the language of human beings. Hence, all expressions like "I whet my glittering sword" are metaphorical. Has God a sword? Does he slay with a sword? It is a figure of speech; it is all figurative.— —

Chapter 2

It is our duty to love and revere this honored and revered God, as it is written: "You shall love the Lord your God." "You shall revere the Lord your God" (Deuteronomy 6:5, 13).
Now, what is the way that leads to the love of him and the reverence for him? When a person contemplates his great and wondrous acts and creations, obtaining from them a glimpse of his wisdom, which is beyond compare and infinite, he will promptly love and glorify him, longing exceedingly to know the great Name of God, as David said: "My whole being thirsts for God, the living God" (Psalm 42:3). When he ponders over these very subjects, he will forthwith recoil startled, conceiving that he is a lowly, obscure creature,— — as David said: "As I look up to the heavens thy fingers made … what is man that thou shouldst think of him?" (Psalm 8:4-5).— —

Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5

All those who belong to the house of Israel are commanded to sanctify the great Name of God, as it is written: "I will be sanctified among the people of Israel"; they must take heed lest they profane it, as it is written: "You shall not profane my holy name" (Leviticus 22:32). If, for example, a heathen arises and threatens a Jew to violate any of the precepts that are mentioned in the Torah, or he will kill him, the Jew should commit the transgression rather than be slain, for it is written concerning the precepts: "If a man obeys them, he shall live by them" (Leviticus 18:5)—live by them, and not die by them. He is to blame for his death if he dies rather than commit a transgression.
This applies to all commandments except those concerning idolatry, illicit sex behavior, and bloodshed. If a Jew is told to transgress one of these three or he will be killed, he should suffer death rather than transgress.— —

Anyone who is enjoined to transgress rather than be killed is to blame for his death if he chooses to die rather than transgress. On the other hand, anyone who is enjoined to suffer death rather than transgress has sanctified the Name of God by suffering death rather than transgressing. If his martyrdom was in the presence of ten Jews, he sanctified the Name of God publicly like Daniel, Hananyah, Mishael and Azaryah, or like Rabbi Akivah and his colleagues. These are the martyrs than whom none ranks higher.— —





Anyone who voluntarily transgresses any of the commandments enjoined in the Torah, not under compulsion but spitefully and contemptuously, profanes the Name of God.— — If he transgressed in the presence of ten Jews, he has profaned the Divine Name publicly. On the other hand, whoever abstains from a transgression, or performs a good deed for no selfish reason, such as fear or vainglory, but only for the sake of the Creator, blessed be he, as in the case of Joseph who resisted his master's wife, sanctifies the Name of God.
There are other things which are included in the term <i>profanation of the Name</i>. When a great Jewish scholar, who is widely known for his piety, does certain things that make people talk against him, even though they are not sins, he profanes the Name of God.— — On the other hand, if the scholar has been scrupulous in his conduct, gentle in his conversation, sociable, and receiving fellow men cheerfully, without insulting those who embarrass him, but showing courtesy to all, even to men who treat him with disrespect, and conducting his business affairs with integrity,— — traits for which he is admired and loved by all who desire to follow his example, he sanctifies the Name of God, and concerning him it is written: "He said to me: You are my servant, Israel, through whom I will be glorified" (Isaiah 49:3).

Chapter 6



Chapter 7


The prophets are of varied degrees. Just as one scholar is greater than another in scholarship, so is one prophet greater than another in the gift of prophecy. The prophets see their prophetic visions only in dreams at night or by day, following a trance that falls upon them, as it is written: "I make myself known to him by visions, I talk to him in dreams" (Numbers 12:6). When they have a prophetic experience, their limbs tremble, their physical strength fails them, their thoughts become confused, and their mind is free to comprehend the vision it sees.— —
The things imparted to the prophet in a prophetic vision are conveyed to him in the form of an allegory. Its interpretation is immediately impressed upon his mind during the vision, so that he knows what it signifies.— —
The prophets do not prophesy whenever they please. They first concentrate their minds, relaxing, joyous and cheerful, and remain in solitude. Prophecy does not descend upon one who is sad or lazy, but results from joy. For this reason, the young prophets had lutes, drums, flutes, and lyres playing in front of them when they desired to prophesy (I Samuel 10:5). The word <i>mithnabbeim</i>, used in that connection, means that they were getting ready to prophesy, as one would say: "So-and-so is getting to be great."
Those who seek the gift of prophecy are called <i>sons of prophets</i>. Even though they concentrate their minds, the divine spirit may or may not descend upon them.

Chapter 8



Chapter 9

It is clearly stated in the Torah that its laws, enduring forever, will undergo no change, diminution or augmentation, as it is written: "Whatever I command you, you shall be careful to observe, adding nothing to it, taking nothing from it" (Deuteronomy 13:1).— — Hence, you may infer that no prophet is permitted to introduce anything new in the Torah. If anyone should arise, therefore, Jew or non-Jew, showing signs and wonders, and declaring that God has sent him to add a precept to the Torah or take away a precept from the Torah, or to give an interpretation to any of the commandments contrary to what we have heard from Moses, or asserting that the commandments enjoined to Israel are not for all generations but only temporary—he is a false prophet, because he sets out to deny the prophecy of Moses. He is punished by death through strangling for having spoken perversely in the name of God that which he did not command him. The Lord, blessed be his name, enjoined Moses that this Law shall be for us and for our children forever, and God is not a man that he should break his word.
This being so, why then is it written in the Torah: "I will raise up a prophet for them among their own people, like yourself" (Deuteronomy 18:18)? The prophet here alluded to will not come to establish a new religion, but to charge the people concerning the words of the Torah and to warn them against transgressing it, as the last of the prophets asserted: "Remember the Torah of Moses my servant" (Malachi 3:22).— —