Mishneh Torah, Foundations of the Torah
משנה תורה, הלכות יסודי התורה
The Mishneh Torah by Maimonides. trans. by Moses Hyamson, 1937-1949
https://www.nli.org.il/he/books/NNL_ALEPH002108865

Mishneh Torah, Foundations of the Torah



Chapter 1

The basic principle of all basic principles and the pillar of all sciences is to realise that there is a First Being who brought every existing thing into being. All existing things, whether celestial, terrestrial, or belonging to an intermediate class, exist only through His true Existence.
If it could be supposed that He did not exist, it would follow that nothing else could possibly exist.
If, however, it were supposed that all other beings were non-existent, He alone would still exist. Their non-existence would not involve His non-existence. For all beings are in need of Him; but He, blessed be He, is not in need of them nor of any of them. <sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** The Arabic numerals are as in the printed editions; the Roman numerals, as in the Bodleian Manuscript.</i> Hence, His real essence is unlike that of any of them.
This is what the prophet means when he says "But the Eternal is the true God" (Jer. 10:10); that is, He alone real, and nothing else has reality like His reality. The same thought the Torah expresses in the text: "There is none else besides Him" (Deut. 4:35) ; that is : There is no being besides Him, that is really like Him.
<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** The Arabic numerals are as in the printed editions; the Roman numerals, as in the Bodleian Manuscript.</i> This being is the God of the Universe, the Lord of all the Earth. And He it is, who controls the Sphere (of the Universe) with a power that is without end or limit; with a power that is never intermitted. For the Sphere is always revolving; and it is impossible for it to revolve without someone making it revolve. God, blessed be He, it is, who, without hand or body, causes it to revolve.
To acknowledge this truth is an affirmative precept, as it is said "I am the Lord, thy God" (Ex. 20:2; Deut. 5:6). And whoever permits the thought to enter his mind that there is another deity besides this God, violates a prohibition ; as it is said "Thou shalt have no other gods before me" (Ex. 20:3; Deut. 5:7), and denies the essence of Religion—this doctrine being the great principle on which everything depends.
This God is One. He is not two nor more than two, but One; so that none of the things existing in the universe to which the term one is applied is like unto His Unity; neither such a unit as a species which comprises many units (e.g. sub-species), nor such a unit as a physical body which consists of parts and dimensions. His Unity is such that there is no other Unity like it in the world.  If there were plural deities, these would be physical bodies; because entities, that can be enumerated and are equal in their essence, are only distinguishable from each other by the accidents<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* <i>Accidents</i> here is the logical term expressing the feature peculiar to an individual distinguishing him from other individuals in his class or properties distinguishing one class from another.</i> that happen to physical bodies. If the Creator were a physical body, He would have bounds and limits, for it is impossible for a physical body to be without limits; and where a body is limited and finite, its energy is also limited and finite. And our God, blessed be his Name, since His power is infinite and unceasing—for the Sphere (of the Universe) is continually revolving—His power is not the energy of a physical body. And since He is not a physical body, the accidents that happen to physical bodies do not apply to Him, so as to distinguish Him from another being. Hence, it is impossible that He can be anything but One. To realize this truth is an affirmative precept, as it is said "The Eternal, our God, is One God" (Deut. 6:4).
That the Holy One, blessed be He, is not a physical body, is explicitly set forth in the Pentateuch and in the Prophets, as it is said "(Know therefore) that the Lord, He is God in Heaven above, and upon the Earth beneath" (Deut. 4:39); and a physical body is not in two places at one time. Furthermore, it is said, "For Ye saw no manner of similitude" (Deut. 4:15); and again it is said, "To whom then will Ye liken me, or shall I be equal ?" (Is. 40:25). If He were a body, He would be like other bodies.
Since this is so, what is the meaning of the following expressions found in the Torah: "Beneath his feet" (Ex. 24:10); "Written with the finger of God" (Ex. 31:18); "The hand of God" (Ex. 9:3); "The eyes of God" (Gen. 38:7); "The ears of God" (Num. 11:1); and similar phrases ? All these expressions are adapted to the mental capacity of the majority of mankind who have a clear perception of physical bodies only. The Torah speaks in the language of men. All these phrases are metaphorical like the sentence "If I whet my glittering sword" (Deut. 32:41). Has God then a sword and does he slay with a sword? The term is used allegorically and all these phrases are to be understood in a similar sense. That this view is correct is proved by the fact that one prophet says that he had a vision of the Holy One, blessed be He, "Whose garment was white as snow" (Dan. 7:9),while another says that he saw Him "with dyed garments from Bozrah" (Is. 63:1) Moses, our teacher, himself saw Him at the Red Sea as a mighty man waging war (Ex. 15:3) and on Sinai, as a Congregational Reader wrapped (in his Talith)—all indicating that in reality He has no form or figure. These only appeared in a prophetic vision. But God's essence as it really is, the human mind does not understand and is incapable of grasping or investigating. And this is expressed in the scriptural text "Canst thou, by searching, find out God? Canst thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? (Job 11:7).
What was it that Moses sought to comprehend, when he said "Show me, I beseech thee, Thy glory?" (Ex. 33:18). He sought to have so clear an apprehension of the truth of God's existence that the knowledge might be like that which one possesses of a human being, whose face one has seen and whose image is imprinted on the mind and whom, therefore, the mind distinguishes from other men. In the same way, Moses, our teacher, asked that the truth of God's existence might be distinguished in his mind from other beings, and that he might thus know the truth of God's existence, as it really is. God replied that it is beyond the mental capacity of a human creature, composed of body and soul, to obtain in this regard clear knowledge of the truth. The Almighty, however, imparted to Moses, what has been vouchsafed to no man before or since. Moses attained so much knowledge of the truth of the Divine Existence, that God was, in his mind, distinct from other beings, in the same way as an individual, whose back is seen, whose physical form and apparel are perceived, is distinguished in the observer's mind from the physical form of other individuals. And Scripture hints this in the text "Thou shalt see My rearward but my face shall not be seen" (Ex. 33:23).
Since it has been demonstrated that He is not a body, it is clear that none of the accidents of matter can be attributed to Him; neither conjunction nor separation, neither location nor dimension, neither ascent nor descent, neither right nor left, neither front nor rear, neither a sitting nor a standing posture. Nor does He exist in time, in the sense that He has either a beginning, end or definite number of years. Nor does He change, for there is nought in Him that would effect a change in Him. He does not die, nor has He life like that of an animal body. Folly is not an attribute of His Being, nor wisdom, like that of a wise man ; neither passion nor frivolity; neither joy nor melancholy; neither silence nor speech like that of human beings. And so the sages have said, "Above, there is neither sitting nor standing, neither rigidity nor relaxation."
This being so, the expressions in the Pentateuch and books of the Prophets already mentioned, and others similar to these, are all of them metaphorical and rhetorical, as for example, "He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh" (Ps. 2:4), "They have provoked me to anger with their vanities" (Deut. 32:21), "As the Lord rejoiced" (Deut. 28:63), etc. To all these phrases, applies the saying "The Torah speaks in the language of men." So too, it is said "Do they provoke Me to anger?" (Jer. 7:19); and yet it is said "I am the Lord, I change not" (Malachi 3:6). If God was sometimes angry and sometimes rejoiced, He would be changing. All these states exist in physical beings that are of obscure and mean condition, dwelling in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust. Infinitely blessed and exalted above all this, is God, blessed be He.

Chapter 2

This God, honoured and revered, it is our duty to love and fear ; as it is said "Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God" (Deut. 6:5), and it is further said "Thou shalt fear the Lord, thy God" (Deut. 6:13).
And what is the way that will lead to the love of Him and the fear of Him ? When a person contemplates His great and wondrous works and creatures and from them obtains a glimpse of His wisdom which is incomparable and infinite, he will straightway love Him, praise Him, glorify Him, and long with an exceeding longing to know His great Name ; even as David said "My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God" (Ps. 42:3). And when he ponders these matters, he will recoil affrighted, and realize that he is a small creature, lowly and obscure, endowed with slight and slender intelligence, standing in the presence of Him who is perfect in knowledge. And so David said "When I consider Thy heavens, the work of Thy fingers——what is man that Thou art mindful of Him?" (Ps. 8:4-5). In harmony with these sentiments, I shall explain some large, general aspects of the Works of the Sovereign of the Universe, that they may serve the intelligent individual as a door to the love of God, even as our sages have remarked in connection with the theme of the love of God, "Observe the Universe and hence, you will realize Him who spake and the world was."
All that the Holy God, blessed be He, created in His universe falls into three divisions. Some are creatures consisting of substance and form, continuously coming into being and decaying. Such are bodies of human creatures and other animals, plants and minerals. Others are creatures consisting of substance and form which do not however like those of the first category, change, from one body to another or from one form to another, but retain their form permanently in their substance, not varying like the members of the former class. Such are the heavenly spheres and the stars placed in them. Their substance is not like other substances nor are their forms like other forms. Others again are creatures that consist of form without substance. These are the angels. For the angels are not material bodies, but only forms distinguished from each other.
What then is meant when the prophets say that they saw an angel of fire, possessing wings? Such descriptions are to be understood as prophetic visions and are to be taken in an allegorical sense. They are meant to indicate that the angel is not corporeal and has no gravity like bodies which have weight. Thus too, it is said "For the Lord, thy God, is a devouring fire" (Deut. 4:24). Yet God is not fire. The expression is a metaphor. Similarly it is said "He makes his angels winds" (Ps. 104:4).
In what way are these forms different from each other, seeing that they are incorporeal ? The answer is that, in their essential being, they are not equal. Each of them is below another and exists by the other's energy, and so, throughout, one angel being above the other. And all exist by the power and goodness of the Holy God, blessed be He. Solomon, in his wisdom, alludes to this in the text "For higher than the high, One watcheth" (Eccles. 5:7).
When we say that one angel is below another, this does not refer to position in space as when we think of an individual who occupies a higher seat than another, but to superiority in rank, as when one says in reference to two scholars, one of whom has more wisdom than the other, that he is the higher in degree, or when one says of the cause that it is higher than the effect.
The variety of names that the angels bear has reference to the difference in their rank. They are called <i>Hayoth Hakodesh</i>—these are the highest; <i>Ophanim, Erelim, Hashmalim, Seraphim. Malachim</i>: <i>Elohim, Bene Elohim, Cherubim</i> and <i>Ishim.</i> These ten names, by which the angels are called, correspond to their ten degrees. The highest rank, above which there is no degree higher but that of God, blessed be He, is that of the form called <i>Hayoth.</i> In the prophetic literature it is therefore said that the <i>Hayoth</i> are beneath the Throne of Glory. To the tenth degree, belongs the form of those termed <i>Ishim.</i> They are the angels that commune with the prophets and appear to them in the prophetic vision. They are called <i>Ishim</i> (individuals, men), because their rank approximates to that of the intelligence of human beings.
All these forms live, realize the Creator, and possess a knowledge of Him that is exceedingly great—a knowledge corresponding with the rank of each but having no relation to the infinite greatness of the Creator. Even the highest class of angels, cannot attain to a knowledge of the truth concerning God as He really is. For this, their capacities are insufficient. But the highest angelic form apprehends and knows more than the one below it; and so on, through all the degrees down to the tenth. This, too, knows God with a knowledge, to the like of which, human beings, consisting of matter as well as form, cannot attain. But none of them knows the Creator as He knows himself.
All beings, except the Creator, from the highest angelic form to the tiniest insect that is in the interior of the earth, exist by the power of God's essential existence. And as He has self-knowledge, and realizes His greatness, glory and truth, He knows all, and nought is hidden from Him.
The Holy One, blessed be He, realizes His true being, and knows it as it is, not with a knowledge external to himself, as is our knowledge. For our knowledge and ourselves are separate. But as for the Creator, blessed be He, His knowledge and His life are One, in all aspects, from every point of view, and however we conceive Unity. If the Creator lived as other living creatures live, and His knowledge were external to Himself, there would be a plurality of deities, namely; He himself, His life, and His knowledge. This however, is not so. He is One in every aspect, from every angle, and in all ways in which Unity is conceived. Hence the conclusion that God is the One who knows, is known, and is the knowledge (of Himself)—all these being One. This is beyond the power of speech to express, beyond the capacity of the ear to hear, and of the human mind to apprehend clearly. Scripture, accordingly says "By the life of Pharaoh" and "By the life of thy soul" but not "By the life of the Eternal". The phrase employed is "As God liveth"; because the Creator and His life are not dual, as is the case with the life of living bodies or of angels. Hence too, God does not apprehend creatures and know them because of them, as we know them, but He knows them because of Himself. Knowing Himself, He knows everything, for everything is attached to Him, in His Being.
What has been said on this topic in these two chapters is but a drop in the ocean, compared with what has to be elucidated on this subject. The exposition of all the principles alluded to in these two chapters forms the so-called <i>Maaseh Mercabah</i> — "Account of the Divine Chariot" (Ezekiel Chap. 1).
The ancient sages enjoined us only to discuss these subjects privately, with one individual, and then only if he be wise and capable of independent reasoning. In this case, the heads of the topics are communicated to him, and he is instructed in a minute portion of the subject. It is left to him to develop the conclusions for himself and to penetrate to the depths of the subject. These topics are exceedingly profound; and not every intellect is able to grasp them. Solomon, in his wisdom, said, in regard to them, by way of parable: "The lambs<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">*) A play upon <span>כבשׂים</span> which means “lambs” and <span>כבשׁים</span> “secrets”.</i> will be for thy clothing" (Prov. 27:26). Thus have the sages said, in the exposition of this parable, "matters that deal with the mystery of the universe shall be for thy garment, that is, for thee alone; do not expound them in public". So too, Solomon said concerning these topics "Let them be for thee alone and not for strangers with thee" (Prov. 5:17). And he further said concerning these subjects "Honey and milk are under thy tongue" (Solomon's song 4:11). This text the ancient sages have thus explained, "The things that are like milk and honey shall be under thy tongue".

Chapter 3

The spheres are entitled: Heaven, Firmament, Habitation and Celestial Clouds (Araboth). There are nine spheres. The one nearest to us is the Lunar sphere. The second above it is the sphere which contains the star called Mercury. Above this, is the third sphere, in which Venus moves. The fourth sphere is that to which the Sun belongs. The fifth, that of Mars; the sixth, that of Jupiter. The seventh, that of Saturn; the eighth, that in which move all the other stars that are visible in the sky; the ninth is the sphere which revolves daily from East to West. It includes and encircles all things. That the stars seem all to be in the same sphere, though in reality they are at different altitudes, is due to the fact that the spheres are clear and transparent like glass or sapphire. Hence, the stars in the eighth sphere appear to be beneath the first sphere.
Everyone of the eight spheres in which the stars move is divisible into numerous spheres, one above the other, like the several layers of onions. Some spheres revolve from west to east; others from east to west, as for instance, the ninth sphere, which moves from east to west. And between the spheres, no vacuum intervenes.
All of these spheres are neither light nor heavy. None of them is red, black or of any other colour. That they appear blue is an optical phenomenon, due to the height of the atmosphere. The spheres are tasteless and inodorous, these properties being found only in bodies that exist below them.
All these spheres that encompass the world, are round like a globe, and the Earth is suspended in the centre. Some of the stars have small spheres in which they are fixed, and which do not revolve round the earth. But the small sphere which does not revolve round the earth is itself fixed in a large sphere which does revolve.
The number of all the spheres that revolve round the world is eighteen. The number of the small spheres that do not so revolve is eight. And from the courses of the stars, from their known daily and hourly rate of movement, from their declination from the south towards the north and from the north towards the south, from their height above the earth and their approximation to it, the number of these spheres can be ascertained, as well as the lines of their movement and the courses they traverse. This forms the Science of Mathematical Astronomy, on which the Greek sages composed many treatises.
The Ninth sphere which encompasses the universe was divided by the ancient sages into twelve parts. To each of these, they assigned a name according to the form which the stars exactly below that part seemed to assume. These are the Constellations that are respectively called Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces.
The Ninth Sphere itself has no division; none of these shapes, nor any star. It is only in grouping the stars in the eighth sphere, that they assume such forms or approximately so. These twelve forms were situated directly opposite these divisions only at the period of the Flood, when those names were given them. At present, they have somewhat shifted. For the stars in the Eighth Sphere all move like the Sun and Moon; but move slowly, so that a distance traversed by the Sun or Moon in a day takes one of these stars approximately seventy years to cover.
Of the visible stars, some are so small that the Earth is larger than any one of them; while others are so large that each of them is several times the size of the Earth. The magnitude of the Earth is about forty times that of the Moon. The magnitude of the Sun, one hundred and seventy times that of the Earth. Hence, the Sun is approximately six thousand and eight hundred times the size of the Moon. No star is larger than the Sun; nor smaller than a star in the second sphere.
Every star and sphere has a soul and is endowed with knowledge and intelligence. They are living beings who apprehend 'Him who spake and the world was'. They praise and glorify their Creator, just as the angels do, each according to its greatness and degree. And as they apprehend God, so they are conscious of themselves and of the angels above them. The knowledge possessed by the stars and spheres, is less than that of angels, more than that of human beings.
Below the Sphere of the Moon, God created matter unlike that of the spheres. And for this matter, He created four forms which are unlike the form of the Spheres. Each of these forms was set in a different portion of this matter. The first of these forms—that of Fire—was combined with a part of the sublunary matter and the result was the actual body of fire. The second form—that of Air—was united with another portion and the result was the actual body of air. The third form—that of Water—was joined to another portion and the result was the actual body of water. The fourth form—that of Earth—was combined with another portion and the result was the actual body of earth. Thus beneath the firmament, there are four distinct bodies, one above the other; the higher completely surrounding those below it on all sides, like a sphere. The first, nearest the sphere of the Moon, is the body of Fire: beneath it, the body of Air; below this, the body of Water; below this again, the body of Earth. Between these bodies, there is no vacuum.
These four bodies are without souls. They have neither knowledge nor perception, and are thus like dead bodies. Each of them has a governing principle of which it has no knowledge nor apprehension, and which it cannot alter. And this is expressed by David in the text "Praise the Lord from the Earth, ye sea-monsters and all depths; fire and hail, snow and vapours" (Ps. 148:7-8). The meaning of the passage is: Praise Him, ye children of men, because of the manifestations of His might, which you see in fire, hail and the other created things beneath the sky; the power of which, old and young constantly perceive.

Chapter 4

These four bodies, namely: fire, air, earth and water, are the basic elements of all created things that are beneath the firmament. All things—man and beast, bird, reptile, fish, plant, minerals, precious stones and pearls, stones for building, mountains and clods of earth are, as far as their matter is concerned, composed of these four elements. And accordingly, apart from the four elements, all bodies beneath the firmament are composed of a substance and form—this substance consisting of a combination of the four elements. Each of these four elements, however, consists of form and matter only.
The nature of fire and air is to ascend from below; that is, from the centre of the earth, upward towards the sky. The nature of water and earth is to move from beneath the sky downward, towards the centre, for the centre of the firmament is the lowest point beyond which there is no lower. Their movement is not conscious nor voluntary. It is a governing principle fixed in them and a nature impressed upon them. The nature of fire is hot and dry; this element is the lightest of all. Air is hot and moist; water, cold and moist; earth, dry and cold. This last is the heaviest of all the elements. Water is lighter than earth and is therefore found above the surface of the Earth. Air is lighter than water; hence, it blows above the water. Fire is lighter than air. And since these are the basic elements of all bodies that exist beneath the firmament, the substance of every such body, whether of man, beast—domestic and wild—bird, fish, plant, mineral, or stone, is made up of fire, air, water and earth. These four elements mingle and become changed at the time of their combination, so that the resulting compound bears no resemblance to any of them. In the compound, there is not a single particle that is fire alone, or water alone, or earth alone or air alone. All these elements have been transformed and fused into one body. Every such body possesses in itself, at one and the same time, the properties of cold and heat, moisture and dryness. But there are some in which the predominating element is fire, such as, for example, animals; in these, therefore, the quality of heat is particularly noticeable. In other bodies as, for instance, stones, earth is the predominant element. Hence, their marked feature is dryness. In other bodies again, water is the prevailing element; and their characteristic is humidity. Thus too, one body will be hotter than another which also has some heat; or drier than another which is also dry. So too, in some bodies, cold is marked; in others, moisture alone will be noticeable. In others again, cold and moisture, or cold and dryness, will be perceptible, in equal degree and at the same time; similarly with heat and dryness, or heat and humidity. In accordance with the proportion of an element in a compound, will its force and nature manifest itself in that compound.
Everything made up of these four elements, ultimately disintegrates. This process takes place in the case of some things after a few days; in the case of others, after several years. But everything compounded of them must inevitably revert to them. Even gold and the carnelian cannot but disintegrate and return to their original elements; part becoming fire; part, water; part, air; and part, earth.
Since everything that disintegrates dissolves into these elements, why was the first man especially told "And unto <i>dust</i> shalt thou return" (Gen. 3:19)? The reason is because the human structure consists, for the greater part, of dust. Everything, capable of decay, does not, during this process, immediately revert to its four elements. It frequently disintegrates and becomes another thing which, in its turn, changes into something else. At the end of these changes, it resolves into its elements. And so all things continually recur.
These four elements are ceaselessly, daily and hourly, changing into each other; but only partially, not completely. How so ? That part of earth which is nearest in its nature to water, alters, crumbles and becomes water; that part of water which is nearest in nature to air, becomes attenuated and turns into air; that portion of air most akin to fire, is transformed into fire. And so too, a reverse process takes place. That part of fire, which is nearest in nature to air, condenses and changes into air. That portion of air most akin to water, condenses and turns into water. That part of water most akin to earth, solidifies and becomes earth. These transmutations take place slowly, gradually and in the course of a long period. Nor does the whole of the element change to the extent that all the water in a body turns into air; or all the air into fire; for it is impossible that an element should altogether disappear; but part only turns from fire into air or <i>vice versa,</i> and such mutual changes take place in all the four elements in a perpetual cycle.
The changes arise from the movement of the Sphere. This causes the four elements to combine and produce other substances—those of human beings and other animals, vegetables, stones and minerals. To each of these substances God gives its suitable form through the angels of the tenth degree, called "<i>Ishim</i>", "Individuals".
You can never see matter without form, or form without matter. But the human mind divides in thought an existing body into its constituents and recognises that it is made up of matter and form. It also knows that in some objects, the matter is composed of the four elements; while in others, it is simple, consisting of one substance. The forms that are devoid of matter cannot be perceived with the physical eye but only with the mind's eye; in the same way as we are conscious of the Lord of the Universe, without physical vision.
The vital principle of all flesh is the form which God has given it. The superior intelligence in the human soul is the specific form of the mentally normal human being. To this form, the Torah refers in the text "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness" (Gen. 1:26). This means that man should have a form that knows and apprehends idealistic beings that are devoid of matter, such as the angels which are forms without substance, so that (intellectually) man is like the angels. The text, above quoted, does not refer to the visible features—the mouth, nose, cheeks, and other distinguishing bodily marks. These are comprehended in the nomenclature "feature". Nor does it refer to the vital principle in every animal by which it eats, drinks, reproduces, feels and broods. It is the intellect which is the human soul's specific form. And to this specific form of the soul, the Scriptural phrase "in our image, after our likeness" alludes. This form is frequently called "<i>Nephesh", "Ruach"</i> (soul, spirit). One must therefore, in order to avoid mistakes, pay special attention to the meaning of these terms which, in each case, has to be ascertained from the context.
This form of the Soul is not compounded of elements into which it would again dissolve. Nor does it exist by the energy of the vital<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* vital principle—common to all animals.</i><sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* vital principle—common to all animals.</i> principle so that the latter would be necessary to its existence, in the way that the vital principle requires a physical body, for its existence. But it comes directly from God in Heaven. Hence, when the material portion of our being dissolves into its component elements, and physical life perishes—since that only exists in association with the body and needs the body for its functions, this form of the Soul, is not destroyed, as it does not require physical life for its activities. It knows and apprehends the Intelligences that exist without material substance; it knows the Creator of All things; and it endures for ever. Solomon, in his wisdom, said, "And the dust returneth to the earth as it was, and the spirit returneth to God who gave it" (Eccles. 12:7).
The matters just discussed are like a drop in a bucket, and are very deep, but are not as deep as those treated in the First and Second Chapters. The exposition of the topics dealt with in the Third and Fourth Chapters, is termed <i>Maaseh Bereshith</i> (cosmogony). Our ancient sages enjoined us that these matters are not to be expounded in public, but should be communicated and taught to an individual privately.
What distinction is there between the <i>Maaseh Mercabah</i> (Ezek. I) and the <i>Maaseh Bereshith ?</i> The subject matter of <i>Maaseh Mercabah</i> is not expounded even to an individual unless he is wise and able to draw conclusions independently; and then, only the heads of the subjects are communicated to him. But the topics of the <i>Maaseh Bereshith</i> are taught to an individual; and even if he is unable to form independent conclusions we nevertheless teach him as much as he is capable of learning on these matters. Why is the subject not taught in public ? Because not every one possesses the breadth of intellect requisite for obtaining an accurate grasp of the meaning and interpretation of all its contents.
When a man reflects on these things, studies all these created beings, from the angels and spheres down to human beings and so on, and realises the Divine Wisdom manifested in them all, his love for God will increase, his soul will thirst, his very flesh will yearn, to love God. He will be filled with fear and trembling, as he becomes conscious of his own lowly condition, poverty and insignificance, and compares himself with any of the great and holy bodies; still more when he compares himself with any one of the pure forms that are incorporeal and have never had association with corporeal substance. He will then realise that he is a vessel full of shame, dishonour and reproach, empty and deficient.
The topics connected with these five precepts, treated in the above four chapters, are what our wise men called <i>Pardes,</i> (Paradise), as in the passage "Four went into <i>Pardes"</i> (T.B. Chagiga 14). And although those four were great men of Israel and great sages, they did not all possess the capacity to know and grasp these subjects clearly. Therefore, I say that it is not proper to dally in <i>Pardes</i> till one has first filled oneself with bread and meat; by which I mean knowledge of what is permitted and what forbidden, and similar distinctions in other classes of precepts. Although these last subjects were called by the sages "a small thing" (when they say "A great thing, <i>Maaseh Mercabah;</i> a small thing, the discussion of Abaye and Rava"), still they should have the precedence. For the knowledge of these things gives primarily composure to the mind. They are the precious boon bestowed by God, to promote social well-being on earth, and enable men to obtain bliss in the life hereafter. Moreover, the knowledge of them is within the reach of all, young and old, men and women; those gifted with great intellectual capacity as well as those whose intelligence is limited.

Chapter 5

All the members of the house of Israel are commanded to sanctify the great Name of God, as it is said "But I will be hallowed among the children of Israel" (Lev. 22:32). They are furthermore cautioned not to profane it, as it is said "Neither shall ye profane My holy Name" (Lev. 22:32). How are these precepts to be applied? Should an idolater arise and coerce an Israelite to violate any one of the commandments mentioned in the Torah under the threat that otherwise he would put him to death, the Israelite is to commit the transgression rather than suffer death; for concerning the commandments it is said "which, if a man do them, he shall live by them" (Lev. 18:5): "<i>Live</i> by them, and not die by them". And if he suffered death rather than commit a transgression, he himself is to blame for his death.
This rule applies to all the commandments, except the prohibitions of idolatry, inchastity and murder. With regard to these: if an Israelite should be told "transgress one of them or else you will be put to death", he should suffer death rather than transgress. The above distinction only holds good if the idolater's motive is personal advantage; for example, if he forces an Israelite to build him a house or cook for him on the Sabbath, or forces a Jewess to cohabit with him, and so on; but if his purpose is to compel the Israelite to violate the ordinances of his religion, then if this took place privately and ten fellow-Israelites were not present, he should commit the transgression rather than suffer death. But if the attempt to coerce the Israelite to transgress was made in the presence of ten Israelites, he should suffer death and not transgress, even if it was only one of the remaining commandments that the idolater wished him to violate.
All the foregoing applies to a time free from religious persecution. But at a period when there is such persecution, such as when a wicked king arises like Nebuchednezzar and his confederates, and issues decrees against Israel, with the purpose of abolishing their religion or one of the precepts, then it is the Israelite's duty to suffer death and not violate any one, even of the remaining commandments, whether the coercion takes place in the presence of ten Israelites or in the presence of idolaters.
When one is enjoined to transgress rather than be slain, and suffers death rather than transgress he is to blame for his death. Where one is enjoined to die rather than transgress, and suffers death so as not to transgress, he sanctifies the name of God. If he does so in the presence of ten Israelites, he sanctifies the name of God publicly, like Daniel, Chananiah, Mishael and Azariah, Rabbi Akibah and his colleagues. These are the martyrs, than whom none ranks higher. Concerning them it is said, "but for Thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are accounted as sheep for the slaughter" (Ps. 44:23). And to them also, the text refers, "Gather my saints together unto Me, those that have made a covenant with Me by sacrifice" (Ps. 50:5). Where one is enjoined to suffer death rather than transgress, and commits a transgression and so escapes death, he has profaned the name of God. If the transgression was committed in the presence of ten Israelites, he has profaned the name of God in public, failed to observe an affirmative precept—to sanctify the name of God—and violated a negative precept—not to profane His Name. Still, as the transgression was committed under duress, he is not punished with stripes and, needless to add, he is not sentenced by a court to be put to death, even if, under duress, he committed murder. For the penalty of death or stripes is only inflicted on one who transgresses of his own free will, in the presence of witnesses and after due warning. This rule is based on the text concerning one who has given of his seed to Molech. "And I will set my face against <i>that</i> man" (Leviticus 20:3). The demonstrative "<i>that</i>" has been traditionally interpreted as exempting from punishment one who transgresses under compulsion, in ignorance or in error. Now, if in the case of idolatry which is the gravest of offences, the (divine) penalty of Excision and, needless, to add, the judicial penalty of death are not incurred by one who worships an idol under compulsion; then how much more is this the rule in regard to the violation of the other precepts of the Torah. So too, in connection with offences against chastity, it is expressly stated, "But unto the damsel<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">*) who had been raped.</i> thou shalt do nothing" (Deut. 22:26). However, if an individual is able to save himself and escape from the power of the wicked king and does not do so, he is like a dog that returns to its vomit. He is called a wilful idolater, is excluded from the world to come, and descends to the lowest depth of <i>Gehinnom.</i>
If heathens said to a group of Jewish women "Surrender one of your number to us, that we may defile her, or else we will defile you all," they should all suffer defilement rather than surrender to them a single person in Israel. So too, if heathens said to Israelites, "Surrender one of your number to us, that we may put him to death, otherwise, we will put all of you to death", they should all suffer death rather than surrender a single Israelite to them. But if they specified an individual, saying "Surrender that particular person to us, or else we will put all of you to death", they may give him up, provided that he was guilty of a capital crime like Sheba, son of Bichri (who rebelled against David). But this rule is not told them in advance. If the individual specified has not incurred capital punishment, they should all suffer death rather than surrender a single Israelite to them.
The principle of non-liability in case of duress also applies to sickness. If one is dangerously sick, and the physicians assert that he can be cured by the application of a remedy which involves violation of a precept of the Torah, the remedy should be applied. Where life is in danger, anything forbidden in the Torah may be used as a curative agent, except the practice of idolatry, unchastity or murder. Even to save life, these offences must not be committed. If a patient transgressed the prohibition and recovered, the Court sentences him to the punishment prescribed for the offence.
Whence is the rule derived, that even when life is in danger, none of these three offences may be committed ? From the text, "And thou shalt love the Lord, thy God, with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy might," (Deut. 6:5). This means that love for God has to be manifested even at the cost of life. As to taking the life of an Israelite, to cure another individual or to rescue a person from one who threatens violence, reason indicates that one human life ought not to be destroyed to save another human life. Offences against chastity are analogous to the destruction of human life; for it is said "For, as when a man riseth against his neighbour, and slayeth him, even so is this matter." (Deut. 22:26).
The rule that forbidden things may only be employed as remedies where there is danger to life, applies only to their use in the ordinary way in which food is enjoyed, as for instance, if a patient is prescribed a diet of "abominable and crawling creatures (Lev. 11:29, 41, 43), or of leavened bread during Passover, or of any food on the Day of Atonement. But where forbidden things are to be used not in the ordinary way in which they are enjoyed, as for example, to apply on Passover a plaster or poultice, made of leaven, or one made of fruit of the first three years' produce of a tree at any time, or to drink a potion in which forbidden food is mingled with a bitter ingredient, so that the palate is not gratified—in all these cases the use of forbidden food is permitted even where there is no danger to life. Exceptions to this rule are the produce of mixed seed in a vineyard, and a dish of meat and milk cooked together. These may not be used even in ways other than those in which food is ordinarily enjoyed. Hence, even when not consumed as food, these may not be used as remedies, except where there is danger to life.
If a man set his eyes on a woman, fell sick and was nigh to death, and the physicians said that there was no cure for him, unless she cohabit with him,—let him die and let her not cohabit with him, even though she be unmarried. Nor is a decision given him that he may converse with her from behind a fence.<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* where he does not see her</i> Let him die rather, and let not such a decision be rendered, so that the daughters of Israel shall not be regarded as unprotected—and thus the restraints of chastity would be loosened.
If one transgresses any of the commandments laid down in the Torah, of his own will and not under the stress of compulsion, but wantonly and in a spirit of provocation, he profanes the Name of God. And thus, in the text prohibiting false swearing, it is said, "So thou wilt profane the name of thy God". (Lev. 19:12). One who commits a transgression in the presence of ten Israelites is guilty of the public profanation of God's Name. On the other hand, whoever abstains from a transgression or fulfils a precept, not from any personal motive, not induced thereto by fear and apprehension or by the desire for honour, but solely for the sake of the Creator, blessed be He, as Joseph did when he resisted his master's wife, sanctifies the Name of God.
There are other things that are a profanation of the Name of God. When a man, great in the knowledge of the Torah and reputed for his piety does things which cause people to talk about him, even if the acts are not express violations, he profanes the Name of God. As, for example, if such a person makes a purchase and does not pay promptly, provided that he has means and the creditors ask for payment and he puts them off; or if he indulges immoderately in jesting, eating or drinking, when he is staying with ignorant people or living among them; or if his mode of addressing people is not gentle, or he does not receive people affably, but is quarrelsome and irascible. The greater a man is the more scrupulous should he be in all such things, and do more than the strict letter of the law requires. And if a man has been scrupulous in his conduct, gentle in his conversation, pleasant towards his fellow-creatures, affable in manner when receiving them, not retorting, even when affronted, but showing courtesy to all, even to those who treat him with disdain, conducting his commercial affairs with integrity, not readily accepting the hospitality of the ignorant nor frequenting their company, not seen at all times, but devoting himself to the study of the Torah, wrapped in <i>Talith</i> and crowned with phylacteries, and doing more than his duty in all things, avoiding however, extremes and exaggerations—such a man has sanctified God, and concerning him, Scripture saith, "And he said unto me, 'Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified' ". (Is.49:3).

Chapter 6

Whoever destroys any one of the holy and pure Names by which the Holy One, blessed be He, is called, incurs, according to scriptural enactment, the penalty of stripes; for referring to idol-worship, it is said, "And ye shall destroy their name out of that place. Ye shall not do so unto the Lord, your God" (Deut. 12:3-4).
There are seven such Names. The name written JHVH.<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* JHVH and Adonai are pronounced alike, and are counted as <i>one name.</i></i> This is the Proper Name of the Deity, as it is also, when written Adonai; El; Eloah; Elohim; Elohé; or Elohai; Shaddai; Zebaoth. Whoever erases even a single letter of any of these seven Names is punished with stripes.
Prefixes to these Names may be erased; as, for example, <i>Lamed</i> in La'Adonai, <i>Beth</i> in Be'elohim, and so forth. These and similar prefixes have not the sanctity of the Names of God. But suffixes to the Divine Name, as for instance, final <i>Chaph</i> in Elohecha or <i>Chaph,</i> and final <i>Mem</i> in Elohechem etc., must not be erased. They are holy like the other letters of the Divine Name, which invests them with its own sanctity. Yet, notwithstanding that they have thus been sanctified, and it is forbidden to erase them, any one who does erase such suffixes does not incur the scriptural penalty of stripes, but receives the punishment of flagellation for contumacy.
Once <i>Aleph, Lamed</i> of Elohim or <i>Yod, He</i> of JHVH has been written, it may not be erased. The rule concerning the latter is obvious, since, besides being a holy name by itself, it is part of the Tetragrammaton. But if one has written <i>Shin, Daleth</i> of Shaddai or <i>Tsadi, Beth</i> of Zebaoth, these letters may be erased.
Other epithets used to praise God, such as <i>Gracious and Merciful, The Great, Mighty and Revered; The Faithful, Zealous and Powerful,</i> and so on, are like the rest of The Sacred Scriptures. The erasure of these terms is permitted.
If a vessel had a divine name inscribed on it, the portion with the Name should be cut out and hidden. If such a Name is even engraved on a plate or glass vessel, one melting the vessel is punished with stripes. The portion containing the Name should be cut out and hidden. So also, if a Divine Name is written on a man's flesh, he must not bathe, anoint himself, or stand in an unclean place. If occasion arises for taking a ritual bath, a reed should be wound over the Name and then the bath may be taken. If he has no reed, he is to wrap his garment about that part of his body on which the name is written, not however so tightly as to prevent the access of the water, the reason for this rule being that it is forbidden to stand nude in the presence of the Divine Name.
Whoever with destructive intent demolishes a single stone of the Altar, Sanctuary or any part of the Temple Court, is punished with stripes; as it is said in reference to idolatry, "And ye shall break down their altars…. Ye shall not do so unto the Lord, your God." (Deut. 12:3-4). So also, whoever with destructive intent kindles wood belonging to the Sanctuary, is punished with stripes; as it is said, "And burn their groves with fire… Ye shall not do so to the Lord, your God." (ibid. 12:3-4).
It is forbidden to burn or otherwise by one's act destroy any of the Sacred Scriptures, their commentaries or expositions. Whoever by his act does so destroy them, is punished with stripes for contumacy. This rule only applies to Scriptures written by an Israelite, conscious of their sacred character. But if an Israelite who is an infidel wrote a Scroll of the Torah, it is to be burnt with all the Names of God contained therein. The reason is that he does not believe in the sanctity of the Divine Name and did not write it for its sake, but regarded it like any other writing. This being his view, the Divine Name, which he wrote, never became sanctified. It is a religious duty to burn it, so as to leave no record of infidels or their works. But if a non-Israelite wrote the Divine Name, it is put away in a place of concealment. So also, copies of Holy Writ that have become worn out or that had been written by a non-Israelite, are to be put away in such a place.
All the names (of God) occurring in the account of the Life of Abraham are holy, including that in the text, "O Lord, if I have found favour in thy sight." (Gen. 18:3). All the Names (Adonai) in the Story of Lot are not holy, except the one in the text, "Oh, not so, O Lord; behold, now, thy servant hath found grace in Thy sight" (Gen. 19:18-19). All the names (of God) occurring in the story of Gibeah of Benjamin (Judges ch. 20) are holy. Names of God in the story of Micah (Judges ch. 17) are not holy. Those in the story of Naboth (I Kings ch. 21) are holy. The name <i>Solomon,</i> wherever it occurs in the Song of Songs, is holy<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">*) As allegorically it refers to God.</i> and is like other divine epithets. The one exception is that of the text "Thou, O Solomon, shalt have the thousand" (Canticles 8:12). Wherever the word <i>King</i> is found in the book of Daniel, it is a secular term except in the text, "Thou art King, King of Kings" (Dan. 2-37) where it is like other divine epithets.

Chapter 7

It is one of the basic principles of religion that God inspires men with the prophetic gift. But the spirit of prophecy only rests upon the wise man who is distinguished by great wisdom and strong moral character, whose passions never overcome him in anything whatsoever, but who by his rational faculty always has his passions under control, and possesses a broad and sedate mind. When one, abundantly endowed with these qualities and physically sound, enters the "Paradise"<sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">**) See above 4:13 for an explanation of this term.</i> and continuously dwells upon those great and abstruse themes,—having the right mind capable of comprehending and grasping them; sanctifying himself, withdrawing from the ways of the ordinary run of men who walk in the obscurities of the times, zealously training himself not to have a single thought of the vanities of the age and its intrigues, but keeping his mind disengaged, concentrated on higher things as though bound beneath the Celestial Throne, go as to comprehend the pure and holy forms <sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* spiritual beings.</i> and contemplating the wisdom of God as displayed in His creatures, from the first form to the very centre of the Earth, learning thence to realize His greatness—on such a man the Holy Spirit will promptly descend. And when the spirit rests upon him, his soul will mingle with the angels called <i>Ishim</i><sup class="footnote-marker">**</sup><i class="footnote">** Angels of the tenth, the lowest degree (See above, chapter 2, paragraph 7).</i>. He will be changed into another man and will realise that he is not the same as he had been, and has been exalted above other wise men, even as it is said of Saul "And thou shalt prophesy with them, and shalt be turned into another man." (I Sam. 10:6).
The prophets are of various degrees. Just as one sage is greater in wisdom than another, so, in the gift of prophecy, one prophet is greater than another. All the prophets experienced prophetic manifestations only in dreams, at night, or by day after a deep sleep had fallen upon them; as it is said, "I do make Myself known unto him in a vision. I do speak with him in a dream" (Num. 12:6). At the time when they had the prophetic experience, their limbs trembled, their physical strength failed them, their thoughts became confused; and thus the mind was left free to comprehend the vision it saw, as is said in reference to Abraham, "And 10, an horror of great darkness fell upon him" (Gen. 15:12), and of Daniel, "And my comeliness was turned in me into corruption, and I retained no strength." (Dan. 10:8).
The matters communicated to the prophet in a prophetic vision are communicated to him in allegorical form. Its interpretation is immediately impressed upon his mind, simultaneously with the vision, so that he grasps what it means. Such, for example, was the case with the vision the Patriarch Jacob saw (Gen. 28:12-15) of a Ladder with angels ascending and descending it—a type of the Monarchies and their oppression of Israel; the <i>Chaioth</i> in Ezekiel's vision (Ezek. Chap. 1); the Seething Cauldron (Jerem. 1:13) and the Rod of an Almond Tree (Jerem. 1:11) seen by Jeremiah; the Scroll seen by Ezekiel (Ezekiel 2:9) and the Ephah (measure) seen by Zechariah (Zech. 5:6) and so with the rest of the prophets. Some, like these prophets, recited the allegory together with its interpretation. Others only gave forth the interpretation. Sometimes, as in the case of some prophecies of Ezekiel and Zechariah, they only recited the allegory. All the prophets prophesied in allegories and riddles.
The prophets did not prophesy whenever they pleased, but had to concentrate their minds, resting, joyous and cheerful, and in solitude. For the spirit of prophecy does not descend upon one who is melancholy or indolent, but comes as a result of joyousness. And therefore, the Sons of the Prophets had before them psaltery, tabret, pipe and harp, (I Sam. 10:5) and thus sought a manifestation of the prophetic gift. This is expressed in the phrase, "And they were <span>מתנבאים</span> (ibid. 10:5), which means, that they were on the way to prophesy, before they actually did so, as one might say, "That person is becoming great."
Those who sought the prophetic gift were called Sons of the Prophets. Although they concentrated their minds, the Divine Spirit might or might not rest upon them.
The foregoing observations refer to the manner in which prophecy was vouchsafed to all the earlier and later prophets with the exception, however, of our teacher, Moses, the chief of all the prophets. In what respects was the prophecy of Moses distinguished from that of the other prophets ? All the prophets received their inspired messages in a dream or in a vision; Moses while awake and standing, as it is said, "And when Moses went into the tent of meeting, that He might speak with him, then he heard the Voice speaking unto him". (Num. 7:89). All the prophets received their messages through the medium of an angel. Hence, what they saw, they saw as an allegory or riddle—Moses received his message not through an angel, as it is said, "Mouth to mouth will I speak with him" (Num. 12:8), "The Lord spake unto Moses face to face" (Exod. 33:11); furthermore "And the similitude of the Lord doth he behold" (Num. 12:8); that is to say, that it was no allegory that was revealed to Moses but he realized the prophetic message clearly, without riddle and without parable. To this, the Torah testifies in the text, "Even manifestly, not in dark speeches" (Num. 12:8), which means that he received his prophecy not as a riddle, but had a clear and lucid vision. All the prophets (when receiving their messages) were filled with fear and consternation and became physically weak. Not so, our teacher Moses, of whom scripture says, "As a man speaketh unto his neighbour." (Ex. 33:11). Just as a man is not startled when he hears the words of his fellow-man, so the mind of Moses was vigorous enough to comprehend the words of prophecy while retaining his normal state. None of the prophets could prophesy at their pleasure. It was otherwise with Moses. He was invested with the prophetic spirit and was clothed with the power of prophecy whenever he pleased. There was no need for him specially to concentrate his mind and prepare for the prophetic manifestations; since he was ever intent and in readiness like the ministering angels. He therefore prophesied at all times; as it is said, "Stand ye still and I will hear what the Lord will command concerning you." (Num. 9:8). In this regard God made him a special promise, as it is said, "Go, say unto them: 'Return ye to your tents. But as for thee, stand thou here by me' ". (Deut. 5:27-28). Hence it may be inferred that all the prophets, when the prophetic power left them, returned to their tents, that is, attended to the satisfaction of their physical needs. Moses, our teacher, never went back to his former tent. He accordingly permanently separated himself from his wife, and abstained from similar gratifications. His mind was closely attached to the Rock of the Universe. The Divine Glory never departed from him; the skin of his face sent forth rays of light, and he was sanctified like the angels.
The gift of prophecy may be vouchsafed to a prophet, intended for him alone, to develop his mind and increase his knowledge, so that he may know what hitherto he had not known concerning exalted themes. Sometimes the prophet is sent on a special mission to a particular people or to the inhabitants of a certain city or kingdom, to direct them aright, teach them what they are to do or restrain them from the evil courses they were pursuing. And when so sent, a sign or token may be given him, so that the people might know that God had in truth sent him. Not every one showing a sign or token is on that account to be accepted as a prophet. Only if a man, by reason of his wisdom and conduct wherein he stands preeminent among his contemporaries, is already recognised as worthy of the prophetic gift, and his life, in its sanctity and renunciation, is favourable to the prophetic calling,—then, when he shows a sign or token and asserts that God had sent him, is it one's duty to listen to his message, as it is said, "Unto him ye shall hearken". (Deut. 18:15). It is, however, possible that such a man may show a sign and token and yet not be a prophet. The sign may be a mystery. Nevertheless, it is a duty to listen to him, for, being a great and wise man, worthy of the prophetic gift, we give him the benefit of the presumption. For thus too are we enjoined to decide a suit on the evidence of two competent witnesses. Though it is possible that they may have given false testimony, still having accepted them as competent witnesses, we rely on their qualification. On these and such like matters, it is said, "The secret things belong unto the Lord, our God; but the things that are revealed, belong unto us and to our children" (Deut. 29:28). And further it is said, "For man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart" ( Sam. 16:7).

Chapter 8

Israel did not believe in Moses, our Teacher, on account of the tokens he showed. For when one's faith is founded on tokens, a lurking doubt always remains in the mind that these tokens may have been performed with the aid of occult arts and witchcraft. All the signs Moses showed in the Wilderness, he performed because they were needed, and not to support his prophetic claims. Thus, when it was necessary that the Egyptians should be drowned, he divided the Red Sea and drowned them in its depths. We needed material sustenance; he brought down the Manna for us. The people thirsted; he clave the rock for them. Korah's company denied his authority; the earth swallowed them up. And so with all the other tokens. What then were the grounds of the faith in him ? The Revelation on Sinai which we saw with our own eyes, and heard with our own ears, not having to depend on the testimony of others, we ourselves witnessing the fire, the thunder, the lightning, Moses entering the thick darkness after which the Divine Voice spoke to him, while we heard the call, "Moses, Moses, go, tell them thus and thus". And so it is said, "The Lord spoke with you, face to face" (Deut. 5:4); and furthermore, "The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers only, [but with us, <i>even us,</i> who are all of us here alive this day"] (Deut. 5:3). Whence do we know that the Sinaitic Revelation is the sole proof that Moses' prophetic mission is true ? From the text, "Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and may also believe in thee for ever." (Ex. 19:9). Hence the inference that before that event they did not believe with a faith that would endure for ever, but only with a faith followed by hesitating and doubting speculation.
As those to whom Moses was sent, were themselves witnesses to the truth of his prophecy, there was no need for him to show them any other sign, since they and he were witnesses to the same matter. They were like two persons who saw an event together. When giving their testimony in such a case, each of them is a witness that the other is telling the truth, and neither need bring proof of the credibility of the other. So was it with Moses, our Teacher. After the Revelation on Sinai, all Israel became witnesses for him; and there was no need for him to show them any further sign. The Almighty indicated this to Moses at the beginning of the latter's career, when He gave him signs which he was to perform in Egypt, and said to him, "They shall hearken to thy voice" (Ex. 3:18). Moses realised that belief based on signs leaves lurking doubts and is followed by musings and speculation. He therefore sought to avoid the acceptance of his mission, and said, "But 10, they will not believe me" (Ex. 4:1), till the Almighty informed him that these signs were only to serve till our ancestors had departed from Egypt. "And when they will have gone forth and stand at the foot of this mountain," God said to Moses, "their doubts about thee will disappear. For here, I will give thee a sign by which they will know that it was I who sent thee from the first, and no vestige of doubt will linger in their mind". And this is what is meant in the text, "And this shall be a token unto thee that I have sent thee; when thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God at this mountain" (Ex. 3:12). Hence one may conclude with regard to every prophet after Moses, that we do not believe in such a prophet because of the signs he shows, as much as to say that only if he shows a sign, we shall pay heed to him in all that he says, but we believe in him, because of the charge laid down by Moses in the Torah that if the prophet gives a sign "ye shall listen to him"; just as the Lawgiver directed that a cause is to be decided on the evidence of two witnesses even if we have no certainty as to whether they are testifying to the truth or to a falsehood. Similarly, it is our duty to listen to the prophet though we do not know if the sign he shows is genuine or has been performed with the aid of sorcery and by secret arts.
Hence too, if a prophet were to arise and perform signs and wonders, and seek to deny the prophetic character of Moses, our teacher, we would not have to listen to him and would be clearly certain that those signs were wrought by secret arts and witchcraft. For Moses' authority as a prophet is not founded upon signs, in which case we might have weighed the signs of one prophet against those of another. But with our eyes we saw and with our ears we heard the divine Voice, even as he (the claimant to prophecy) also heard it. To what may this be compared? To persons testifying in the presence of a man concerning an incident which he saw with his own eyes and denying that it took place as he saw it. He will surely not accept their statement, but will be convinced that they are false witnesses. The Torah accordingly ordains that even if the sign or token takes place, you are not to listen to the words of such a prophet; since he shows a sign and token in order to deny what you saw with your own eyes. As we only accept signs (as a prophet's credentials) because we are so bidden in the commandment given us by Moses, how shall we, on the strength of such a sign, accept a man as a prophet, who seeks to repudiate Moses' prophecy for the truth of which we have the evidence of our own eyes and ears ?

Chapter 9

It is clearly and explicity set forth in the Torah that its ordinances will endure for ever without variation, diminution or addition; as it is said, "All this word which I command you, that shall ye observe to do; thou shalt not add to it, nor take away from it" (Deut. 13:1); and further it is said "but the things that are revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of this Law" (Deut. 29:28). Hence the inference that to fulfil all the behests of the Torah is an obligation incumbent upon us for ever, as it is said, "It is an everlasting statute throughout your generations". (Lev. 23:14, Num. 18:23). It is also said, "It is not in heaven" (Deut. 30:12). Hence the inference that a prophet is forbidden to make innovations in the Torah. Accordingly, if any one should arise, whether among the Gentiles or among the Israelites, and, showing a sign and token, declare that God had sent him to add a precept to the Torah or take away a precept from the Torah, or give an interpretation to any of the commandments, such as we had not heard from Moses; or should assert that the commandments ordained to Israel are not of perpetual obligation for all generations but only temporary, such a man is a false prophet, because he sets out to deny the prophecy of Moses. He is to be put to death by strangling because he spoke perversely in the name of God that which God had not bidden him, for the Lord enjoined Moses that this Commandment shall be unto us and to our children after us for ever. And God is not a man that he should lie.
Since this is so, why is it said in the Torah, "I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like unto thee" (Deut. 18:18)? The answer is that the prophet here referred to, will come, not to found a religion, but to charge the people concerning the words of the Torah and exhort them not to transgress it; as the last of the prophets expressed it, "Remember ye the law of Moses, My servant" (Malachi 3:22). And so, if the prophet gives an order in regard to things permissible, as for instance, if he says "Go to that place" or "Do not go to it", "Wage war today" or "Do not wage war", "Build this wall" or "Do not build it", it is a duty to obey him. Whoever transgresses his instructions incurs the penalty of death by the hand of God, as it is said, "And it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not hearken unto the words of the prophet which he shall speak in My Name, I will require it of him." (Deut. 18:19).
So too, a prophet who acts contrary to his own exhortations or suppresses the prophetic message he is charged to deliver, incurs the penalty of death by the hand of God. To all the above three offences applies the text "I will require it of him" (Deut. 18:19). So also, if one, who is known to us as a prophet, bids us transgress on a certain occasion any precept of the Torah or several such precepts—whether minor or major—it is our duty to obey him. For thus were we taught by the ancient sages, on the authority of tradition, that if the prophet tells you to transgress the precepts of the Torah, as Elijah did on Mount Carmel, obey him in all matters, unless the commandment be to worship idols; this is the rule however only when the prophet's instruction is for a single occasion. Such was the case of Elijah at Mount Carmel. He offered up burnt offerings outside the Temple, while the Sanctuary in Jerusalem was the place appointed for such sacrifices, and any one who offered them up outside the appointed place incurred the penalty of excision. But because Elijah was a prophet, it was obligatory to heed him, and even in the above case, the rule applied "Unto him shall ye hearken" (Deut. 18:15). If Elijah's contemporaries had asked him, "How dare we abrogate the precept, "Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy offering in any place…."(Deut. 12:13), the prophet would have replied, "This verse only refers to one who constantly offers up sacrifices outside the Sanctuary; such a person incurs the penalty of excision prescribed by Moses. But <i>I</i> propose to offer up sacrifices outside the Temple, this day only, by the express commandment of God, for the purpose of discrediting the prophets of Baal." And thus, if prophets order the violation of a precept for a set time, it is a duty to obey the direction. But if they declare that the precept is abrogated for ever, they incur the penalty of death by strangling, for the Torah said "Unto us and to our children for ever". (Deut. 29:28).
So too, if a prophet attempts to rescind any of the institutions that have come down to us by tradition, or if, in reference to a moot point, he asserts that the Almighty had instructed him as to what was the decision and that the rule was according to the view of a certain teacher, he is a false prophet, and should be strangled, even if he showed a token, since he proposes to deny the Torah which has laid down the principle "It is not in Heaven" (Deut. 30:12). But if his direction be only for a single occasion, we obey him in all things.
These rules apply to all precepts but not to the prohibition of idolatry. If a prophet bids us worship idols even on a single occasion, we are not to listen to him. And though he performs great signs and wonders, if he says that the Almighty commanded him that an idol should be worshipped this day only or this hour only, he speaks perversely against the Eternal. Scripture charges us in such a case, "And even if the sign or wonder come to pass… thou shalt not hearken unto the words of that prophet…., because he hath spoken perversely against the Lord, your God". (Deut. 13:3-4-6). Since he seeks to discredit the teaching of Moses, we know for certain that he is a false prophet; and whatever he did, was done by secret arts and with the aid of witchcraft, and he is to be strangled.

Chapter 10

A prophet who arises and declares that God sent him, does not need to show a sign like any of the wonders performed by Moses, Elijah or Elisha,—all of which involved changes in the ordinary course of nature. A sufficient sign for him would be if he foretold events that would happen in the world and his predictions came true, as it is said, "And if thou say in thy heart: 'How shall we know the word which the Lord hath spoken, etc.'" (Deut. 18:21). Accordingly, when a man worthy to be a prophet, comes professedly as a messenger of God, and proposes neither to add to the Law nor to take aught from it, but only exhorts his hearers to serve God by obedience to the precepts of the Torah, we do not say to him "Divide for us the sea, or restore a dead person to life, or perform similar miracles, and then we will believe in you;" but we say to him "Foretell coming events". If he does so, we wait to see whether his predictions are fulfilled or not. And if they fail of realisation in the smallest particular, he is manifestly a false prophet. But if everything he said comes true, then he must be accepted by us as trustworthy.
He is to be tested repeatedly. If all his words are found worthy of credence, he is a true prophet, as is said of Samuel "And all Israel, from Dan even to Beersheba, knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of the Lord." ( Sam. 3:20).
But observers of the times and diviners also predict the future. What is the difference, then, between them and the prophet ? The answer is that in the case of the observers of the times, diviners, and their like, part of what they say comes true while part is not fulfilled, as it is said, "Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, prognosticators of [some] new things that shall befall thee, arise and save thee" (Is. 47:13). "Of [some] new things", but not all new things. Possibly too, none of their forecasts will come true; and they may prove wholly mistaken, as it is said, "that frustrateth the tokens of impostors, and maketh diviners mad" (Is. 44:25). But as for the prophet,—all his words come true, as it is said, "Nothing of the word of the Lord shall fall to the earth" (II Kings 10:10), and again it is said, "The prophet that hath My word, let him speak My word faithfully. What hath chaff to do with the wheat, saith the Lord". (Jer. 23:28). This means that the words of the diviners are like chaff with which a little wheat has become mixed, but the word of God is like pure wheat, wholly free from chaff. And herein Scripture gave an assurance and declared that in all those matters on which the soothsayers and the diviners, professing to instruct nations, tell falsehoods, the prophet will give you true knowledge, so that you do not need soothsayer or diviner or the like, as it is said, "there shall not be found among you anyone that maketh his son or his daughters to pass through the fire, [or that useth divination, or soothsayer or enchanter"] (Deut. 18:10), "for these nations that thou art to dispossess hearkened unto soothsayers and unto diviners; but as for thee, the Lord, thy God, hath not suffered thee so to do" (Deut. 18:14). And the text continues, "A prophet will the Lord, thy God, raise up unto thee, from the midst of thee, of thy brethren [like unto me; unto him shall ye hearken"] (Deut. 18:15). Hence we learn that the prophet only has to predict coming events, as to whether there will be plenty or famine, war or peace, etc. He even may instruct an individual in regard to his private affairs; as in the instance of Saul who had suffered a loss and repaired to the prophet to tell him where the strayed asses were. To tell these and such like things is among the prophet's functions, but not to found a new religion, add a commandment to the Law or take a commandment from it.
As to calamities predicted by a prophet, if, for example, he foretells the death of a certain individual or declares that in a particular year there will be famine or war, and so forth, the non-fulfilment of his forecast does not disprove his prophetic character. We are not to say, "See, he spoke, and his prediction has not come to pass". For God is long-suffering and abounding in kindness, and repents of the evil (He threatened). It may also be that those who were threatened repented and were forgiven, as happened to the men of Nineveh. Possibly too, the execution of the sentence is only deferred, as in the case of Hezekiah. But if the prophet, in the name of God, assures good fortune, declaring that a definite event would come to pass, and the benefit promised has not been realised, he is unquestionably a false prophet; for no blessing decreed by the Almighty, even if promised conditionally, is ever revoked. We do not find that God ever revoked aught good that He had promised; except at the destruction of the First Temple, when he promised the righteous that they would not perish with the wicked and changed his purpose. The explanation is given in the Talmudical Treatise Sabbath.<sup class="footnote-marker">*</sup><i class="footnote">* Sabbath 55. “The righteous suffered with the wicked for their failure to reprove the latter”.</i> Hence we learn that only when he predicts good fortune can the prophet be tested. Jeremiah expressed this in his reply to Hananiah, son of Azur, when the former prophesied evil while the latter prophesied good. Jeremiah said to Hananiah: "If my words are not confirmed by events, that will not prove that I am a false prophet. But should your predictions not be fulfilled you will be proved a false prophet; as it is said, "Nevertheless hear thou now this word that I speak,…. the prophet that prophesied of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the Lord hath truly sent him" (Jer. 28:7-9).
A prophet whose prophetic status has been attested by another (recognised) prophet is to be accepted as such and no further investigation is needed. For Moses vouched for Joshua whom all Israel recognised as a prophet even before he had shown any sign. And so in every period, when a prophet is known, and his messages have repeatedly been accepted, or when a prophet is vouched for by another prophet, and conducts himself consistently with the prophetic calling, he must not be made the subject of speculation and misgivings in regard to the character of his prophecy. Nor may we test him excessively. We must not be continually investigating his claims, as it is said, "Ye shall not tempt the Lord, your God, as you tempted Him at Massah" (Deut. 6:16), where the people asked, "Is the Lord among us or not?" (Ex. 17:7). Once it is known that a particular individual is a prophet, they must believe and know that God is in their midst and not harbour doubt or suspicion concerning him; as it is said, "And they shall know that there hath been a prophet among them." (Ezek. 2:5).