Teshuvot HaRosh part IV
תשובות הרא"ש חלק ד
Sefaria Responsa Anthology
http://www.sefaria.org

Teshuvot HaRosh part IV



Teshuva 1



Teshuva 2



Teshuva 3



Teshuva 4



Teshuva 5



Teshuva 6



Teshuva 7



Teshuva 8



Teshuva 9



Teshuva 10

In the year 5073 from the creation of the world, the rains were withheld and only a bit of precipitation fell all winter. A fast was called, to beg God to give rain upon the soil.
On the first night of Passover, after the evening prayers, my master and father, R. Asher, sat at the door to his home, and we, some of his confidantes, stood over him to the right and left. He said: “Now is a good time to raise something about which I have always wondered. Why not invoke and petition for rain  until Shavu’ot?” Some of the confidantes responded: “It would be good to notify the elders to do so.” It was right in their eyes, and they sent word to the synagogue cantor to invoke rain the next day. So they did. The thirteen attributes  were invoked in the large synagogue, and there was a great cry during the invocations. And some of the sages protested that this was done without their counsel, and they spread a rumor saying that it should not have been done, for it portends curse. My father and master, R. Asher, held back and said nothing on that day, until the night of hol ha-mo’ed. Then he wrote a treatise to support his words, and this is its content:
Since I have heard that some are astonished at my words, I have come to explain what I have said—that currently it is not proper to cease invoking and petitioning for rain on the first day of Passover. It was not from when it happened; rather, already many years ago in Germany I protested two things that I saw practiced in those days.
The first is that they do not petition for rain properly. Even though it is stated in the first chapter of Ta’anit (10b): “It is taught: Hananyah says: In the Diaspora, [we do not begin petitioning for rain] until the sixtieth day of the [autumn] season; and R. Huna b. Hiya said in the name of Shmuel: The law accords with Hananyah.” We always follow the Babylonian Sages and practice in accord with their opinions whenever the Babylonian Sages and the Eretz Yisrael Sages dispute each other, for we consider the Babylonian Talmud to be primary. This all applies on matters concerning permitting or prohibiting, obligating or exempting, declaring pure or defiled. But when the matter hinges on the temporal needs, and it does not entail an alteration that transgresses the words of the Torah, it is proper to follow the year, the times, and the season. And Babylon sits on a great deal of water, and they did not require rain until the sixtieth day of the season. Alternatively, the planting season was later in Babylon. But in Germany, where the planting season begins in the middle of Tishrei [=the beginning of autumn], it is well known that if the rains do not fall immediately after the seeds are planted, they will be ruined, as the birds and rats will eat them all. So why should we not practice in accordance with the people of Eretz Yisrael, who petition for rain in Marheshvan [=early autumn], like Rabban Gamliel? For in this matter there is no dispute between the people of Babylon and the people of Eretz Yisrael in the sense that these offer a rationale for why it is proper to follow their position, and those offer a rationale for why it is proper to follow their position. Rather, in Babylon they acted on the basis of their needs, and the Mishna (in Ta’anit), which states that we begin petitioning in Marheshvan, was taught in Eretz Yisrael, in accordance with its needs. Do not wonder: Now that I have written that there is no dispute between them, why is it necessary for Shmuel to rule in accordance with Hananyah? For one can say that since the Mishna teaches that Rabban Gamliel says that we begin petitioning for rain on the seventh of Marheshvan, and R. Elazar stated that the law accords with Rabban Gamliel, I might have said that this should not be altered in any place, so as not to violate the words of the Mishna, as R. Elazar ruled. We thus learn from Shmuel that this is not akin to violating the words of the Mishna, for it was taught in the Land of Israel, according to their locale and needs. Now we may reason a fortiori: If the people of Babylon practice in accordance with their locale and needs by deviating from the Mishna, then certainly the people of Germany should act in accordance with their needs by not deviating from the Mishna. Indeed, we find that this entire Mishna was only taught to the people of Eretz Yisrael, and in accordance with their needs. For [the Talmud] challenges the statement of R. Asi in the name of R. Yohanan (Ta’anit 4b) that the law accords with R. Yehuda, who stated that the last person to pass before the ark [=lead the prayers] on the last day of Sukkot invokes [rain] based on R. Elazar’s statement that the law accords with Rabban Gamliel, who said that we petition for rain starting on the seventh of Marheshvan and that there is no gap between [when we begin] petitioning and [when we begin] invoking, as the Talmud concludes. The Talmud answers: “This is for us, and that is for them.” The Babylonians have produce in the field that they must bring into the house after Sukkot but before the rains begin. Therefore, they do not petition for rain until the seventh of Marheshvan. Alternatively [the Talmud answers]: “Both are for Eretz Yisrael. This refers to a time that the Temple stood, and that refers to a time that the Temple no longer stood.” Thus, we see that all of these times [for beginning to petition for rain] are accord with the needs of the locale and time.
The second practice is that they customarily stop invoking and petitioning for rain on the first day of Passover, whereas it is well known that in Germany the sustenance of the produce is primarily from the rains that fall between Passover and Shavuot. The Mishna (Ta’anit 2a), which states that we stop [invoking rain] in the first day of Passover, was taught to the people of Eretz Yisrael, as I have demonstrated, and for them, the barley harvest was on Passover, and the wheat as well was already standing and only needed to dry out and ripen by Shavu’ot. Thus, rain was an omen of curse for them. But in Germany, where the produce cannot survive without the rain between Passover and Shavuot, [rain] portends blessing for them. So why should we not invoke and petition for rain until Shavuot? The laws of repeating [the Amida] for reciting “morid ha-geshem” [=the invocation of rain] will apply to them after Shavuot, just as it applies to residents of Eretz Yisrael from Passover on; as I have demonstrated, each land invokes and petitions for rain according to its needs. For just as Eretz Yisrael and Babylon have different practices for invoking and petitioning for rain, each according to its needs, so too other lands. For what is the difference? Further proof can be adduced from this (Ta’anit 14b): “The people of Nineveh asked of Rabbi [Yehuda the Prince]: Are those like us, who require rain even in the summer season, considered as individuals, who recite [the petition for rain] in “Shome’a Tefila,” or as a public, who recite it in “Birkat Ha-shanim”?  He sent to them: You are like individuals, and [recite it] in “Shome’a Tefila.” They challenged [from a beraita]: “R. Yehuda said: When does this [cycle of fast days] apply? When the years are as ordained and Israel is settled on its soil. But nowadays, all depends on the year, and the locale, and the season.” You are challenging Rabbi based on a beraita? Rabbi is a tanna and disagrees!” Thus, we see that Rabbi only disagrees regarding the residents of a single city. However, regarding the land of Germany, which is very broad, Rabbi would agree that that they continue petitioning as long as they need rain, and since they petition out of need, they certainly invoke, for invoking also serves the petition. As R. Yohanan state: “As long as one petitions, one invokes.”
I discussed all of these matters before my masters in Germany, and no one challenged my words. Rather, they said: “We do not need to change the practice in Germany, because drought is uncommon there, and often the produce is ruined by excessive rain.”
When I left Germany and passed through Provence, I heard that in Provence they would invoke  the rains on the seventh of Marheshvan, and I deemed this to be quite correct. I said to the sages of Montpelier: “You have answered one of my questions; what do you do with regard to stopping [to invoke and petition for rain]?” They said that they practice in accordance with the Mishna: they stop on the first day of Passover. I said to them: “Is it possible that you do not require rain between Passover and Shavuot?” They told me that they require much rain, and that the produce cannot survive without rain. So I presented my words to them, as they are written above, and they found it to be quite correct, but they said: “That we petition [beginning] on the seventh of Marheshvan is because this was the practice instituted by the early sages. But with regard to stopping, we cannot do anything to change the practice unless we gather all the sages of the land.” I left there without knowing what they agreed to do.
And when I came here, I saw that we need rain between Passover and Shavuot even more than other places. Several times I told my colleagues that it would be proper not to stop invoking and petitioning until Shavuot. For now I know that in all the lands with which I am familiar, the main rains are between Passover and Shavuot, and certainly much of them. Yet I did not dare to speak these words to change the practice.
But now that I see that, because of our sins, the rains have stopped, and the plantings have been ruined, and we are fasting for rains, and even on Sabbaths and holidays, when we do not fast, we invoke the thirteen attributes and recite verses pertaining to rain, my heart has said to me: the time has now come to institute what I have wanted to do for many years, for they will certainly heed me during such a time of distress; and if this is prescribed for them during the present year, they will find it sweet, and they will not relent from it. They would certainly do so, but they tilted their hearts and changed back their minds. 
Regarding their protest against petitioning on the grounds that it portends curse—even in their opinion [rain] does not portend curse until the month of Nisan [=early spring] has ended, as the Mishna states (Ta’anit 12b): “If Nisan ended and rains fell, they portend curse.” Moreover, in the source for their words, have they not realized that it is derived from a verse (I Samuel 12:17): “Is it not the wheat harvest today? [I will call out to the Lord, and he will bring thunder and rain, and you will know and see that your wickedness before the Lord, in that you asked for a king, is excessive]”? And so which harvest is set for right now, that would mean that we do not need rain? Moreover, the Talmud  states on this [Mishna]: “R. Yose b. Avin said: this only applies if no rain had yet fallen, but if rain had previously fallen, the present rain portends blessing.”
Maimonides, of blessed memory, accords with me in his Commentary on the Mishna, which states: “Until when do we petition for rain? R. Yehuda says: until the end of Passover.” The tanna who taught this is not the tanna who taught the previous mishna. And we have already ruled above that the law accords with R. Yehoshua and Rabban Gamliel. This all applies only in Eretz Yisrael and lands whose climate is like its climate. And everything you see them saying about the timing of the fast days only applies in Eretz Yisrael and places with similar climes. But in other lands, the petitioning must be during the season that they require rain in that land, and that time shall be treated as though it is the seventh of Marheshvan. And if the rains are delayed beyond that time, the fast days should be practiced accordingly, for there are lands where the rains only begin in Nisan, and there are lands where Marheshvan is summer. Rains are not good during the sunny season—rather, they ruin and kill. So how can the people of that land petition for rain in Marheshvan? It is a complete lie! This reasoning is all true and appealing.” And in his composition [=Mishneh Torah] he wrote (Laws of Prayer 2:16-17): “From the seventh of Marheshvan, we petition for rain in Birkat Ha-shanim for as long as rain is invoked. What is this said about? Eretz Yisrael. But in Mesopotamia, Syria, Egypt, and places nearby and similar to them, we petition for rain from the sixtieth day of the autumn season. Places that require rain during the sunny season, such as distant islands, petition for rain when they need it, in Shome’a Tefila.”
Superficially, it seems that the Commentary on the Mishna contradicts what he wrote in his composition. In his commentary on the Mishna, he wrote: “But in other lands, the petitioning must be during the season that they require rain in that land, and that time shall be treated as though it is the seventh of Marheshvan.” Thus, we petition in Birkat Ha-shanim. But in his composition he wrote that islands petition for rain in Shome’a Tefila. Yet one who scrutinized his words will find them precise. In the commentary on the Mishna he wrote “lands”—since there is a difference between Eretz Yisrael and Babylon with regard to invoking and petitioning for rain, we can derive that they are not considered as a public,  but are one land, and they recite it during the season that they need to petition for rain, in Birkat Ha-shanim. But in his composition he wrote: “Places that require rain during the sunny season, such as distant islands.” These are not considered separate lands. Thus, they are considered individuals, and they recite it in Shome’a Tefila. It has thus been demonstrated and it is well known that in Germany, which is a large land, and France, and all the lands between Germany and this land, including this land, all require rain between Passover and Shavuot. And they are certainly a public and may petition for rain in Birkat Ha-shanim and invoke rains in the winter like residents of Eretz Yisrael.
But when I saw that they had swayed the heart of the community to not accept the words of the living God from me, I too retracted from petitioning and invoking rain in the synagogue I attend, even though I could have petitioned, and even though I am an individual, since it is a public need. Nevertheless, I did not want to create multiple factions. I would not have written on hol ha-mo’ed, as I am unaccustomed to it, but it is the need of the hour, due to the desecration of God’s name, and it is also, in a small sense, a need of the festival.
Asher b. R. Yehiel
These are all correct words, and they are all compelling to one who understands and clear to those who find knowledge. They are words of reason. I therefore sign my name: David Ha-Kohen b. R. Moshe Ha-Kohen, Yisrael b. Yoseph Yissachar Ha-Levi b. R. Yekutiel Ha-Levi, Moshe Ha-Kohen b. Yehuda Ha-Kohen; Do not cast aspersions on the words of our masters, for lips shall kiss one who responds with clear words. Shlomo b. R. Yaakov 