Mishneh Torah, Leavened and Unleavened Bread
משנה תורה, הלכות חמץ ומצה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Leavened and Unleavened Bread



Chapter 1

Anyone who eats an olive's volume of leavened bread on Passover beginning on the night of the 15th until the end of the 21st of Nissan  intentionally is obligated to [a punishment of] kareit/cutting off, as it was said, "For anyone who eats leavened bread and will be cut off" (Exodus 12:15). Unintentionally - one is obligated to a sacrifice of a fixed type (i.e. non-sliding scale) of sin-offering. This is [the same for] one who eats [it] and one who liquifies and drinks [it].
The leavened bread on Passover is forbidden to derive pleasure from as it is stated: "You will not eat hametz" - there should be no permissive scenario of eating.

Chametz which passed over Passover [under Jewish ownership] is forbidden to derive benefit from forever. This is a penalty imposed by the Rabbis on the Jew who violated [the prohibition of] "thou shalt not see nor shall it be found" so they forbade it even if he left it accidentally or under unavoidable circumstances so that no one would keep chametz around on Passover in order to use afterwards. 

Chapter 2

There is a positive commandment from the Torah to remove the hametz before the time that it is forbidden for consumption as it says (Shemot 12:15) "On the first day, remove the leavened from your homes." From the oral law, they learned that the first day refers to the 14th of Nissan. A proof to this matter is what is stated in the Torah: (Shemot 34:25) "Do not slaughter the animal with hametz in your possession." This means to say do not slaughter [the korban pesach] while the hametz exists. The day of the slaughtering the korban pesach is the 14th day following midday.
And what is this removal that is mentioned in the Torah? It is annulling the hametz in his heart and considering it like dust, and knowing in his heart that it is not in his possession. All the Hametz in his possession is like dust and has no use.
From the Hachamim, one should search for hametz in the hidden areas and cracks, to examine and remove from his boundaries. In addition, it is a Rabbinic injuction to search and destroy hametz on the night of the 14th using a candlelight, since people are usually home and the candle is excellent for searching. One should not establish his learning at the end of the 13th day. The Hacham should not begin to study at this time lest he is drawn, thereby preventing him from searching for hametz at the beginning of this time.

Chapter 3



Chapter 4


From this you can learn that chametz of a Jew that was left in the posession of a non-Jew, even if it was concealed, and even if in a different city or even if entrusted to a gentile, is transgressing "shall not be seen" and "shall not be found". Chametz that was consecrated or that belonged to a non-Jew and was in a Jew's possession, even if it is in the Jew's house, is permitted because it doesn't belong to him. And even if it belongs to an gentile ger toshav that is under the authority of a Jew, we do not force him (the gentile) to abandon his chametz during passover. But it is necessary to establish a division ten tefachim high between his chametz in order to prevent accidental use of it. But consecrated (chametz) need not (be partitioned off) because everyone shies away from consecrated (things) in order not to infringe on the prohibition of "me'ilah".

Chapter 5

There is no prohibition in the category of leavened grains on Passover except the five species of cereal alone; and they are the two species of wheat–being wheat and buckwheat–and the three species of barley–being barley, oats, and rye. But legumes, like rice, beans, lentils and the like, lack the designation of leavened grains; yet even if one had kneaded rice flour and the like in boiling water and covered it in clothes until it rose like leavened dough; indeed this is permitted for eating as this is not fermentation but rather decay.
These five species of cereals, if kneaded with fruit juice alone–without any water, they will never come to be leavened; rather even if they are left out all day until the dough has risen, they are permitted to eat, as fruit juice does not ferment but rather decays. And fruit juices include things like wine, milk, honey, oil, apple juice, pomegranate juice, and the like from the remaining wines, oils, and liquids. And these are those that have never been mixed with water; and if water has been mixed with them at all then they ferment.
One may not cook grains in water like bulgur and not flour like fritters. And if one cooked these indeed these are totally leavened breads; and these are those that have cracked during cooking One may not brown dough in oil on a pan, but one may cook [matzah] bread and browned flour. And if one boiled water a lot and afterwards put flour into it, indeed this is permitted because it is cooked instantly before it can leaven. It was already the custom in Shin'ar (Babylonia), in Spain and in all the West (Egypt and North Africa) to prohibit this by decree lest the water not be boiled quite nicely.
It is permitted to cook the grain or the flour in fruit juice. Same with dough that was kneaded with fruit juice; if they cooked it in fruit juice or browned it on a pan in oil, indeed this is permitted because fruit juices do not ferment.
Fresh [damp] grain that one flashes in fire and grinds, one may not cook its flour in water lest it did not brown nicely in the fire and one will find that it ferments when one cooks it. And so too when one rubs [flour to cover remaining pores in] the new pots, one may not cook anything inside them except for baked matzah that they went back and ground it, but browned flour is prohibited lest they did not brown it nicely and it comes to leaven.

Chapter 6



Chapter 7






In every generation a person must show her/himself that s/he personally had come forth from Egyptian subjugation, as it is stated, "God freed us from there..." (Deut. 6:23). And regarding this, the Holy Blessed One commanded in the Torah, "Remember that you were a slave in the land of Egypt..." (Deut. 5:15, 15:15, 24:22), that is to say, as if you yourself had been a slave, and you came forth into freedom, and you were redeemed.

Chapter 8


Begin with the blessing "who brought forth from the ground" and take a vegetable and dip it in charoset and eat a kazait, he and everyone reclining with him should not eat less than a kazait. Afterwards, take away the table from in front of him and he reads the hagaddah to himself. Mix the second cup, and here the son asks. Why is this night different from all other night? On all other nights we don't dip even once, tonight twice. On all other nights we eat hametz and matzah, tonight only matzah. On all other nights we eat meat roasted, boiled, or cooked, tonight only roasted. On all other nights we eat all kinds of vegetables, tonight only maror. On all other nights we eat while sitting or reclining, tonight we all recline.
In today's times we don't say "tonight only roasted" because we don't have a [pascal] sacrifice. Begin with shame and read until completion of the entire section "arami oved avi".






And afterwards, he recites the Grace after the Meals over a third cup and drinks it. And afterwards, he mixes (pours) a fourth cup and finishes the Hallel (a set order of praises from the Psalms) over it. And he recites the blessing of song and that is "May all of your creatures praise you, etc." And he recites the blessing, "Who creates the fruit of the vine," and does not taste anything afterwards the whole night, except for water. And he should mix (pour) a fifth cup and say upon it the Great Hallel (Psalms 136), from "Give thanks to the Lord, for He is good" (Psalms 136:1) to "Upon the waters of Babylon" (Psalms 137:1). And this cup is not obligatory like the [other] four cups. And he can finish the Hallel anyplace that he desires, even though he is not in the place of the meal.

Chapter 9




We were slaves in Egypt and God took us out with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm. And had God not taken out our ancestors from Egypt, we and our children, and our children's children would still be slaves to Pharaoh in Egypt. So, even if all of our our scholars or prophets, or elders, know the whole Torah, it is still incumbent (a mitzvah) upon us to tell of our leaving Egypt. Anyone who lengthens the telling of the Exodus, this is truly praiseworthy.