Mishneh Torah, Testimony
משנה תורה, הלכות עדות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Testimony



Chapter 1

The witness is commanded to testify in religious court giving all testimony which he knows, whether his testimony will cost his friend or benefit him. This is when he [the witness] is selected to testify in a monetary case, as it is said (Leviticus 5:1) "If he is a witness or saw or knew, if he does not tell, he shall bear his sin."
If the witness is a great sage and he is in a religious court which is his inferior in wisdom, because it is inconsistent with his honor [to appear before the court], the positive commandment of respect for the Torah takes precedence, and he may refrain from going. When are these matters said? For testimony about monetary issues. However, for testimony which prevents forbidden actions, and for testimony about capital matters or matters which could incur the punishment of lashes, he must go and testify, as it says (Berachot 19b), "There is neither wisdom nor understanding against the Lord."
A high priest is never obligated to testify, except where the testimony concerns a King of Israel. [Then,] he goes to the great religious court and testifies. However, he is exempt from providing other testimony.
It is a positive commandment to find witnesses, to interrogate them, to ask them many questions, and examine them closely, moving from topic to topic during the questions so that they will be silenced or recant if their testimony is duplicitous. As it says, (Deuteronomy 13:16), "And you shall search, and interrogate, and ask well." Additionally, the judges must be careful while interrogating the witnesses [lest the witness learn from the judges' statements how to lie. With seven questions they examined them:] Which seven-year cycle was it? Which year? Which month? What day of the month? What day of the week? How many hours of the day? And in which place? Even if he said "Today he killed him" or "Yesterday he killed him," they still ask them which seven-year cycle, which year, which month, which day of the month, which day [of the week], and which hour [it occurred]. Among the questions, beyond the seven which apply to everyone, there are additional [questions asked]. If they are testifying about a person, saying that he worshipped strange gods, they ask them what he worshipped and what service he performed. If they are testifying that he desecrated the Sabbath, they ask him which form of [forbidden] labor he performed and in what manner did he do it. If they are testifying that he ate on the Day of Atonement, they ask him which food he ate and how much he ate. If they are testifying that he killed someone, they ask him what he used to kill the person. And similarly, all such questions are included in the interrogation.
The interrogatories and investigations are the matters central to testimony, through which the person is deemed liable of exempt. These include specifying the action done, specifying the time, and specifying the place, because from such testimony the witnesses may be excluded by <i>hazamah</i> [testimony by other witnesses claiming that the first witnesses did not actually witness the act] or not. For we may not exclude witnesses through <i> hazamah </i> unless they have specified the time and place.
Additionally, the witnesses are examined considerably concerning matters not central to their testimony, i.e. where the testimony is not dependent on such matters. These are called examinations. Any increase in examinations is praiseworthy. How are these examinations performed? If they testify that a person has killed, and they are questioned with the seven interrogatories which we delineated, which specify the time and place; if they [the judges] investigated to specify the action, and they [the witnesses] specified the action and the weapon with which he was killed; they are examined further. They say to them, "What was the killer wearing?", or "What was the victim [wearing]? "White or black clothing?" "Was the ground on which he was killed white or red?" These and similar [questions] are the examinations. It once happened that witnesses said that one had killed in a certain place, under a fig tree. They [the judges] investigated, and said to the witnesses, "Were its figs dark or light? The stems - were they long or short?" Any increase in such examinations is praiseworthy.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9









A lunatic's testimony is invalid on a biblical [level] because he is not eligigle [to perform] Mitzvot. This [does not refer to] only to a lunatic who goes naked, breaks things, and throws stones rather anyone whose sanity is impaired and finds his intellect constantly confused on some point even if he can ask [questions] and converse on topic regarding other things. An epileptic is considered a "lunatic" during a seizure, and considered healthy at all other times, whether he is someone who gets seizures at predictable periods or the seizures happen randomly. This is only [true] if he is not always confused for there are epileptics who are mentally impaired even when not experiencing seizures. And one must consider the testimony of someone who has lots of seizures [on a case by case basis].

Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20








Witnesses that testified on someone and equated him to an evildoer that doesn't have a punishment of lashes, nor execution, nor a monetary obligation, and then they became scheming witnesses: These get lashes, even though they didn't scheme for these lashes nor to obligate money. What is the case? They testified on a priest that he was a son of a divorced woman, for example that they testify that in front of us his mother was divorced or performed the rite of chalitza at a specified place and day, and they become scheming witnesses, they get lashes. Similarly if they testify on a person that he killed unintentionally and they become scheming witnesses, they receive lashes and are not exiled.  They testify on this one's bull that it killed a person and they become scheming witnesses: they get lashes and they don't pay the atonement. They testify on a person that he was sold as a Jewish slave and they become scheming witnesses: [they get] lashes. These four laws are from tradition.