Bartenura on Mishnah Mikvaot
ברטנורא על משנה מקואות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Bartenura on Mishnah Mikvaot



Chapter 1



Mishnah 1

SIX LEVELS OF MIKVAHS: the places where water has entered have six levels, each greater than the prior 
POOLED WATER: a hole in the earth into which non-flowing water enters and which contains less than forty seah, which is the requisite amount for a mikvah
POOLED: derived from "puddled water" (Isiah 30:14)
AN IMPURE PERSON DRANK AND A PURE PERSON DRANK, [he becomes] IMPURE: if an impure person drank from this water first, and afterward a pure person cam and drank from it, the pure person is rendered impure. Since a drop fell from the mouth of the impure person into the puddle, and lest the pure person drinks and becomes impure; for he who drinks impure water renders the Terumah invalid. [----]. And even though he doesn't invalidate the Terumah unless he drinks a revi'it, he does in any case become impure once the drop comes to his mouth and renders impure all the water in his mouth with it. And this droplet is not considered Hashokah (osculation) in that there is not forty se'ah, as taught in the end of our Mishna. But through the contact with the impure, the puddle does does not contract impurity until any of its contents are separated from it. And this is as in the Tosefta 
...FILLED WITH A PURE VESSEL: from the water of the puddle after an impure person has drunk from it. We are concerned that the droplet which contracted has impurified the vessel, as vessels can be rendered impure via contact with impure fluid.
IF HE RINSES, the morsel: It is rendered impure. And if he does not [rinse] then it is pure; insofar as pooled water does not become caused to receive impurity until it has been separated, the halacha is that if he does not rinse then it is pure. And even if he elevates the morsel (of terumah) we do not consider the water than comes along with it to have received impurity from the droplet, because the droplet is nullified by the pure water. But if he does rinse it, we consider and designate the water in his hand as having received impurity from the droplet and the droplet is not nullified by that water rather, on the contrary, [that water] is considered impure and therefore renders the morsel impure

Mishnah 2

FILLED WITH A PURE VESSEL: We learned above that the impurity comes to the water on account of the impure person, and here we learn that the impurity comes account of an (impure) vessel

Mishnah 3

IMPURE WATER FALLS: We learn here that, that of Pooled Water can receive impurity on account of impure fluid which falls into it (the Pooled Water)
RABBI SHIMON SAYS WHETHER HE RINSES OR WHETHER HE DOES NOT RINSE: R' Shimon holds in all cases, whether the impurity comes as a result of a person, whether by a vessel, or whether by fluid, in all cases he holds that whether (afterward) he rinsed to morsel or whether he did not rinse the morsel, the morsel is impure. The reasoning of R' Shimon is [as follows] - I say that the impure droplet of water which fell in from the mouth of the impure person or from the vessel or from the (impure) fluid, (that droplet) will remain on the morsel once all the other water has fallen of of it, and it (the morsel) will be impure. The halacha is not in accordance with R' Shimon.

Mishnah 4

OR IF AN IMPURE PERSON WALKED IN IT AND THEN A PURE PERSON DRANK, HE REMAINS PURE: Because Pooled Water does not become caused to receive impurity until it is separated, as we learned above
AS WITH POOLED WATER, PIT WATER...: They are all equal as relates to all the laws we learn in this Misha, up until the second level (of 6 ma'alot). Pits, that is those made circular. [sichin], long and short....
EXTRACTED [water]...mountaintop rainfall CEASED, and the water strains and trickles from the mountain after the rain ceased falling and ceased creeping on the mountain. The water that remains is Pooled Water, and if an impure person drinks from it, or an impure vessel is filled from it, or impure fluid falls in it, the impure droplet is not nullified in it. But throughout the period during which the rain still creeps [down the] mountain, even though the rainfall already ceased, we do not consider it as Pooled Water, and the rain water which afteward creeps down the mountain nullifies the impure droplet, even though the initial water didn't nullify it.