Targum Jonathan on Numbers
תרגום יונתן על במדבר
Pentateuchal Targumim
http://targum.info/targumic-texts/pentateuchal-targumim/

Targum Jonathan on Numbers



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19

AND the Lord spake with Mosheh and Aharon, saying:
This is the decree, the publication of the law which the Lord hath commanded, saying; Speak to the sons of Israel, that they bring to thee from the separation of the fold a red heifer, two years old, in which there is neither spot nor white hair, on which no male hath come, nor the burden of any work been imposed, neither hurt by the thong, nor grieved by the goad or prick, nor collar (band) or any like yoke.
And thou shalt give her unto Elazar, the chief of the priests, who shall lead her alone without the camp, and set round about her a railing (border) of the branches of fig trees; and another priest shall slay her with the two signs before him, after the manner of other animals, and examine her by the eighteen kinds of divisions.
And Elazar, in his priestly dress, shall take of her blood with the finger of his right hand, without (first) containing it in a vessel, and shall sprinkle the border of fig branches, and (afterwards) from the midst of a vessel on one side towards the tabernacle of ordinance, with one dipping, seven times (shall he sprinkle).
And they shall bring her out from the midst of the railing and another priest, while Elazar looketh on, shall burn the heifer, her skin, flesh, and blood, with her dung shall he burn.
And another priest shall take a piece of cedar wood and hyssop, and (wool) whose colour hath been changed to scarlet, and throw them into the midst of the burning of the heifer; and he shall enlarge the burning, that the ashes may be increased. 
And the priest who slew the heifer shall wash his dress in forty satas of water, and afterwards he may go into the camp; but the priest before his ablution shall be unclean until the evening
And the priest who was employed in the burning shall wash his dress in forty satas of water, and his flesh in forty satas, and before his ablution shall be unclean until the evening
And a man, a priest who is clean, shall gather up the ashes of the heifer in an earthenware receptacle, its opening covered round about with clay; and shall divide the ashes into three portions, of which one shall be placed within the wall (of Jerusalem), another in the Mount of Olives, and the third portion be in the custody of the Levites; and it shall be for the congregation of Israel, for the Water of Sprinkling: it is the heifer (immolated) for the remission of sins.
And the priest who gathered up the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes, and before his ablution be unclean till the evening. And this shall be for the cleansing of the children of Israel, a statute for ever.
Whoever toucheth the body of a dead man, or of a child of some months old, either his body or his blood, shall be unclean seven days.
He shall sprinkle himself with this water of the ashes on the third day, and on the seventh day he shall be clean. But if he sprinkle not himself on the third day, his uncleanness will remain upon him, and he will not be clean on the seventh day.
Whoever hath touched the body of a dead man, or of a child nine months old, either the body or the blood, and will not sprinkle himself, he hath defiled the tabernacle of the Lord, and that man shall be cut off from Israel; forasmuch as the water of sprinkling is not sprinkled upon him, he is unclean, his uncleanness is yet on him, until he shall sprinkle himself; yet may he sprinkle and make ablution on the seventh evening.
This is the indication of the law concerning a man when he hath died under the outspread tent every one who entereth into the tent by the way of the door, but not from its side, when its door is open, (or when one hath opened its door,) and whatever is in the tent, its floor, stone, wood, and vessels, shall be unclean seven days.
And every earthen vessel which hath no covering fastened upon its mouth, which would have kept it separate from the uncleanness, is defiled by the uncleanness of the air which toucheth its mouth, and its interior, and not the outside of it (only). [JERUSALEM. And every open vessel which hath no covering of stone upon it shall be unclean.]
And whoever shall touch not one who hath died in his mother's womb, but who hath been slain with the sword on the face of the field, or the sword with which he was slain, or the dead man himself, or a bone of his, or the hair, or the bone of a living man which hath been separated from him, or a grave, or a shroud, or the bier, shall be unclean seven days.
And for him who is unclean, they shall take of the ashes of the burnt sin offering, and put spring water upon them in an earthen vessel.
And let a man, a priest, who is clean, take three branches of hyssop bound. together, and dip (them) in the water at the time of receiving the uncleanness, and sprinkle the tent and all its vessels, and the men who are in it, or upon him who hath touched the bone of a living man that hath been severed from him, and hath fallen, or him who hath. been slain with the sword, or hath died by the plague, or a grave, or a wrapper, or a bier.
And the priest who is clean shall sprinkle upon the unclean man on the, third day, and on the seventh day, and shall make him clean on the seventh day; and he shall sprinkle his clothes, and wash himself with water, and at eventide be clean.
But the unclean man who will not be sprinkled, that man shall be cut off from among the congregation, because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the Lord; the water of sprinkling hath not been sprinkled upon him, he is unclean.
And it shall be unto you an everlasting statute. The priest, also, who sprinkleth the water of sprinkling shall sprinkle his clothes, and he who toucheth the water of sprinkling shall be unclean until evening.
And whatever the unclean person hath touched, though he carry it not, shall be unclean; and the clean man who toucheth him shall be unclean till evening.

Chapter 20

And the whole congregation of the children of Israel came to the desert of Zin on the tenth day of the month Nisan. And Miriam died there, and was buried there.
And as on account of the innocency of Miriam a well had been given, so when she died the well was hidden, and the congregation had no water. And they gathered against Mosheh and Aharon,
and the people contended with Mosheh, and said, Would that we had died when our brethren died before the Lord!
And why hast thou brought the congregation of the Lord into this desert, that we and our cattle may die here?
And why didst thou make us come up out of Mizraim, to bring us to this evil place, a place which is not fit for sowing, or for planting fig trees, or vines, or pomegranates, and where there is no water to drink?
And Mosheh and Aharon went from the face of the murmuring congregation to the door of the tabernacle of ordinance, and bowed upon their faces, and the Glory of the Lord's Shekinah was revealed to them.
And the Lord spake with Mosheh, saying:
Take the rod of the miracles, and gather the congregation, thou, and Aharon thy brother, and both of you adjure the rock, by the Great and manifested Name, while they look on, and it shall give forth its waters: but if it refuse to bring forth, smite thou it once with the rod that is in thy hand, and thou wilt bring out water for them from the rock, that the congregation and their cattle may drink.
And Mosheh took the rod of the miracles from before the Lord, as he had commanded him.
And Mosheh and Aharon gathered the congregation together before the rock. And Mosheh said to them, Hear now, rebels: is it possible for us to bring forth water for you from this rock?
And Mosheh lifted up [JERUSALEM And Mosheh lifted up] his hand, and with his rod struck the rock two times: at the first time it dropped blood; but at the second time there came forth a multitude of waters. And the congregation and their cattle drank.
But the Lord spake to Mosheh and Aharon with the oath, Because ye have not believed in My Word, to sanctify Me in the sight of the children of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this congregation into the land that I will give them.
These are the Waters of Contention, where the sons of Israel contended before the Lord on account of the well that had been hidden; and He was sanctified in them, in Mosheh and Aharon, when (the waters) were given to them.
Then Mosheh sent messengers from Rekem unto the king of Edom, saying, Thus saith thy brother Israel. Thou hast known all the trouble that hath found us;
that our fathers went down into Mizraim and dwelt in Mizraim many days, and the Mizraee afflicted us and our fathers.
And we prayed before the Lord, who heard our prayers, and sent one of the ministering angels to lead us out of Mizraim: and, behold, we are in Rekem, a city built on the side of thy border.
Let us now pass through thy land: we will not seduce virgins, nor carry off the betrothed, nor commit adultery: on the king's highway, under the heavens, we will go forward, and turn not to the right or to the left, to do any injury in the public way while we pass through thy border. [JERUSALEM. Let us now pass through thy country. We will do no kind of mischief, neither seduce virgins nor seek the wives of the men; by the highway of the king we will proceed, nor turn to the right or the left till we have passed through thy coast.]
But Edomea answered him, You shall not go through my coast, lest I come to meet thee with the unsheathed sword.
And Israel said to him, We would go by the king's highway; if we drink thy waters, I and my cattle, I will give thee the price of their value. I will only pass through, without doing wrong.
But he said, You shall not pass through. And Edomea came out to meet him with a large army and with a strong hand.
So Edomea would not suffer Israel to pass through his coast; and Israel turned away from him, because it was commanded from before the Word of the Heavens that they should not set battle in array against them, forasmuch as the time was not yet come when the punishment of Edom should be given into their hands. [JERUSALEM. And Israel turned away from them; for so was the commandment of their Father who is in heaven, that they should not set against them the array of war.]
And the whole congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from Rekem, and came unto Mount Umanom.
And the Lord spake unto Mosheh in the Mount Umanom, on the coast of the land of Edom, saying:
Aharon shall be gathered unto his people; for he shall not enter into the land which I have given unto the children of Israel, because you were rebels against My Word at the Waters of Contention.
Take Aharon and Elazar his son, and make them come up to Mount Umanom.
And thou shalt strip Aharon of his vestments, the adornment (glory) of the priesthood, and put them on Elazar his son; but Aharon shall be gathered, and die there.
And Mosheh did as the Lord commanded him. And they ascended Mount Umanom, in the view of all the congregation.
And Mosheh stripped Aharon of his vestments, [JERUSALEM. And Mosheh drew off from Aharon] the priestly decoration, and put them on Elazar his son; and Aharon died there on the summit of the mountain and Mosheh and Elazar came down from the mount.
And when the soul of Aharon was at rest, the Cloud of Glory was lifted up on the first day of the month Ab; and all the congregation beheld Mosheh come down from the mountain with rent garments; and he wept and said, Woe unto me, for thee, my brother Aharon, the pillar of Israel's prayers! And they too wept for Aharon thirty days, the men and the women of Israel. [JERUSALEM. And all the congregation beheld Mosheh come down from the height of the mountain, with garments rent and dust upon his head, weeping and saying, Woe unto me, for thee, my brother Aharon, the pillar of the prayers of the sons of Israel, who madest atonement for them once every year! In that hour the sons of Israel believed that Aharon was dead; and all the congregation of the children of Israel wept for Aharon thirty days.]

Chapter 21

And Amalek, who had dwelt in the south, and changed, and came and reigned in Arad, heard that the soul of Aharon was at rest, that the pillar of the Cloud which for his sake had led the people of the house of Israel had been taken up, and that Israel was coming by the way of the explorers to the place where they had rebelled against the Lord of the world. For, when the explorers had returned, the children of Israel abode in Rekem, but afterward returned from Rekem to Motseroth, in six encampments during forty years, when they journeyed from Motseroth, and returned to Rekem by the way of the explorers, and came unto Mount Umanom, where Aharon died; (and,) behold, he came and arrayed battle against Israel, and captured some of them with a great captivity. [JERUSALEM. And when the Kenaanite, king Arad, who dwelt in the south, heard that Aharon was dead, that holy man on account of whose merit the Cloud of Glory had protected Israel; that the pillar of the Cloud had been taken up; and that the prophetess Mizraim was dead, on whose account the well had flowed, but had (since) been hidden; he answered and said, Ye servants of war, come and let us set battle in line against Israel; for we shall find the way by which the explorers came up. Therefore they set battle in line against Israel, and carried away some of them with a great captivity.]
And Israel vowed a vow before the Lord and said, If Thou wilt indeed deliver this people into my hand, I will destroy their cities.
And the Lord heard Israel's prayer, and delivered up the Kenaanites, and he destroyed them and their cities. And he called the name of the place Hormah. 
And they journeyed from Mount Umanom, by the way of the Sea of Suph, that they might compass the land of Edom; and the soul of the people was wearied in the way.
And the people thought (wickedly) in their heart, and talked against the Word of the Lord, and contended with Mosheh, saying: Why didst thou bring us up from Mizraim to die in the wilderness; for there is neither bread nor water, and our soul is weary of manna, this light food?
And the bath-kol fell from the high heaven, and thus spake: Come, all men, and see all the benefits which I have done to the people whom I brought up free out of Mizraim. I made manna come down for them from heaven, yet now turn they and murmur against Me. Yet, behold, the serpent, whom, in the days of the beginning of the world, I doomed to have dust for his food, hath not murmured against me: but My people are murmuring about their food. Now shall the serpents who have not complained of their food come and bite the people who complain. Therefore did the Word of the Lord send the basilisk serpents, and they bit the people, and a great multitude of the people of Israel died. [JERUSALEM. The bath‑kol came forth from the midst of the earth, and a voice was heard from the heights, See, all men, and listen and hear, all ye children of flesh. The serpent, whom I cursed at the beginning, and said to him, Dust shall be thy food, hath not complained about his food. I led forth My people from Mizraim free, and caused the manna to descend for them from heaven; I made the quails to come over to them, and the well to spring up from the deep; yet now they again complain before Me on account of the manna, saying, Our soul is aggrieved by this light bread: therefore shall the serpent who hath not complained of his food come and bite this people who have murmured about their food. So the Word of the Lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people, and a great multitude of Israel died.]
And the people came to Mosheh, and said: We have sinned, in thinking and speaking against the glory of the Lord's Shekinah, and in contending with thee. Pray before the Lord to remove the plague of serpents from us. And Mosheh prayed for the people.
And the Lord said to Mosheh, Make thee a serpent of brass, and set it upon a place aloft;[3] and it shall be that when a serpent hath bitten any one, if he behold it, then shall he live, if his heart be directed to the Name of the Word of the Lord.
And Mosheh made a serpent of brass, and set it upon a place aloft; and it was, when a serpent had bitten a man, and the serpent of brass was gazed at, and his heart was intent upon the Name of the Word of the Lord, he lived. [JERUSALEM. And Mosheh made a serpent of brass, and set it upon a high place; and it was that when any one had been bitten by a serpent, and his face was uplifted in prayer unto his Father who is in heaven, and he looked upon the brasen serpent, he lived.]
And the children of Israel journeyed from thence, and pitched in Oboth;
and they journeyed from Oboth, and encamped in the plain of Megistha, in a desert place which looketh toward Moab from the rising of the sun.
Thence they journeyed and encamped in a valley abounding in reeds, osiers, and mandrakes.
And they journeyed from thence, and encamped beyond the Arnon, in a passage of the desert that stretcheth from the coast of the Amoraah; for Arnon is the border of Moab, situate between Moab and the Amoraah; and therein dwelt a priesthood of the worshippers of idols.
Therefore it is said in the book of the Law, where are recorded the wars of the Lord: Eth and Heb, who had been smitten with the blast of the leprosy, and had been banished beyond the confine of the camp, made known. to Israel that Edom and Moab were concealed among the mountains in ambush, to destroy the people of the house of Israel. But the Lord of the world made a sign to the mountains, which pressed one to another so that they died: and their blood flowed through a valley on the brink of the Arnon (or, a valley adjoining Arnon).
And the effusion of the streams of their blood flowed to the habitations of Lechaiath, which were, however, delivered from this destruction, because they had not been in their counsels; and, behold, it was unto the confine of Moab.
And from thence was given to them (the Israelites) the living well, the well concerning which the Lord said to Mosheh, Assemble the people and give them water.
Then, behold, Israel sang the thanksgiving of this song, at the time that the well which had been hidden was restored to them through the merit of Miriam: Spring up, O well, spring up, O well ! sang they to it, and it sprang up:
the well which the fathers of the world, Abraham Izhak, and Jakob digged: the princes who were of old digged it, the chiefs of the people: Mosheh and Aharon, the scribes of Israel, found it with their rods; and from the desert it was given to them for a gift. [JERUSALEM. Therefore it is said in the Book of the Law of the Lord, which is likened to a Book of Wars: The miracles and mighty acts which the Lord wrought for His people, the sons of Israel, when they stood by the Red Sea, so did He with them when they were at the fords of the vale of Arnona. When the children of Israel were passing through the vale of Arnona, the Moabites were hidden in the caverns of the valley, saying: When the Beni Israel are coming through, we will go forth to prevent them, and will slay them. But the Lord of all the world, the Lord, who knew what was in their hearts, for before Him that which is within the reins is manifest,‑the Lord signed to the mountains, and their heads here and there were brought together, and the chiefs of their mighty ones were crushed, and the valleys were overflowed with the blood of the slain. But Israel walked above upon on the top of the hills, and knew not the miracle and mighty act which the Lord was doing for them in the valley of Arnon. But Lechaiath, the city which took no part in their counsel, was delivered from them; and, behold, it is by the confines of the Moabites. 17. Behold then sang Israel this song of praise: Spring up, O well! they sang to it, and it sprang up: the well which Abraham, Izhak, and Jakob, the princes of the world, at the beginning did see, the sages of the world, the Sanhedrin the seventy wise men who were appointed by name beheld it: Mosheh and Aharon, the scribes of Israel, found it with their rods, and from the desert it was given to them as a gift.]
And from thence it was given to them in Mattana; turning, it went up with them to the high mountains, and from the high mountains it went down with them to the hills surrounding all the camp of Israel, and giving them drink, every one at the door of his tent.
And from the high mountains it descended with them to the lower hills, but was hidden from them on the borders of Moab, at the summit of the hill looking toward Bethjeshimon, because there they neglected the words of the Law. [JERUSALEM. And from thence the well was given to them at Mattana, turning it became strong overflowing streams, and again it ascended to the top of the mountains, and went down with them to the ancient valleys; but the well was hidden from them when on the borders of Moab, on the head of the height which overlooketh toward Abeth Jeshimon.]
Then sent Israel messengers to Sihon, king of the Amorites, saying:
I would pass through thy country. We will not carry off the betrothed, nor seduce virgins, nor have to do with the wives of men; by the highway of the King who is in the heavens we will go, until we have passed through thy border.
But Sihon would not permit Israel to pass through his limit, but constrained all his people, and came out to Jahaz, and made war against Israel.
And Israel smote him with the anathema of the Lord, that he would destroy (him) with the edge of the sword; and he took possession of his country, from Arnon unto the Jabbok, unto the border of the children of Ammon; because Rabbath, which is the limit of the children of Ammon, was strong; and so far was their boundary.
And Israel took all those cities, and dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all her villages.
For Heshbon was the city of Sihon, king of the Amorites; for he had beforetime made war with the King of Moab, and had taken all his country from his hand unto the Arnon.
Therefore, say the young men, (or the chosen ones,) using proverbs: The righteous who rule their passions say, Come let us reckon (Heshbon) the strength of a good work by the recompense, and the recompense of an evil work by the strength for whoso is watchful and diligent in the law is builded up and perfected;
for mighty words like fire go forth from the lips of the righteous, the masters of such thought, (calculation, heshbona,) and powerful merit like flames from those who are read and devoted in the law: their fire devoureth the foe and the adversary, who are reckoned before them as the worshippers of the idol altars in the valley of Arnona.
Woe to you, ye haters of the just! ye have perished, ye people of Kemosh, haters of the words of the law, in whom there is no righteousness, unless he waste you to bring you captive unto the place where they teach. the law, and their sons and daughters be removed by captivity of the sword to be near them who consult in its counsels the instructors and those anointed with the law.
The wicked have said, In all this there is nothing lofty to the sight; but your numbers shall perish until the falsehood of your souls be ended, and the Lord of the world destroy them till their lives have expired, and they have come to nothing, as the cities of the Amorites have perished, and the palaces of their princes from the great gate of the house of the kingdom to the street of the smiths which is nigh to Medeba. [JERUSALEM. 27. Therefore say they who speak in proverbs, Ascend. 28. Because the men of their people like fire come out of Heshbon, making war as flames of fire from the city of Sihon: the kings of the Amoraee are slain, the villages of the Moabite cities are destroyed, and the priests are slaughtered who sacrificed before the idols of Arnona. Woe to you of Moab! ye are consumed, destroyed, O worshippers of the idol of Kemosh; your sons and daughters bound by the collar are carried into the captivity of Sihon, king of the Amorites. And the kingdom hath ceased from Heshbon, and the ruler from Dibon, and his ways are made desolate unto the smithies which are nigh to Medaba.]
And Israel, after they had destroyed Sihon, dwelt in the land of the Amorites.
And Mosheh sent Kaleb and Phineas to examine Makbar, and they subdued the villages, and destroyed the Amorites who were there.
Then they turned, and went up by the way of Mathnan; and Og, the king of Mathnan, came out to meet us, he and all his people, to give battle at Edrei.
And it was, when Mosheh saw Og, he trembled before him, stricken with fear: but he (soon) answered and said, This is Og the Wicked, who taunted Abraham our father and Sarah, saying: You are like trees planted by the water channels, but bring forth no fruit: therefore hath the Holy One, blessed be He, spared him to live through generations, that he might see the great multitude of their children, and be delivered into our hands. Then spake the Lord unto Mosheh: Fear him not, for I have delivered him into thy hand, and all his people and country; and thou shalt do to him as thou hast done to Sihon, king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon.
Now it was, after Og the Wicked had seen the camp of Israel spreading over six miles he said with himself, I will make war against this people, that they may not do to me as they have done to Sihon: so went he and tare up a mountain six miles in size, and brought it upon his head to hurl it upon them. But the Word of the Lord forthwith prepared a reptile which ate into the mountain and perforated it, and his head was swallowed up within it; and he sought to withdraw it, but could not, because his back teeth and his front ones were drawn hither and thither. And Mosheh went and took an axe of ten cubits, and sprang ten cubits, and struck him on the ankle of his foot, and he fell, and died beyond the camp of Israel. Thus it is written. And they smote him and his sons and daughters, and all his people, till none of them remained to escape; and they took possession of his land. [JERUSALEM. And Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites. And Mosheh sent to explore Makvar, and they took the villages, and destroyed the Amorites who were there. 34. And when Mosheh saw Og, he said, Is not this Og the Wicked, who taunted Abraham and Sarah, and said, They are like fair trees by fountain of water, but give no fruit ? Therefore the Holy One, blessed be He, hath kept him alive for many years, till the time that he should see their children and children's children, and fall by their hands. Therefore the Lord said to Mosheh, Fear him not, for I have delivered him into thy hand, and all his people, and all his land; and thou shalt do to him as thou hast done to Sichon, king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon.]

Chapter 22

And the children of Israel journeyed, and encamped in the plains of Moab, near the passage of the Jordan (toward) Jericho.
AND Balak bar Zippor saw what Israel had done to the Amoraee.
And the Moabaee feared before the people greatly because they were many, and they were distressed in their life before the sons of Israel.
And they said to the elders of the Midianee, for the people had been one and the kingdom one unto that day: Now will this congregation consume all that is about them, as the ox eateth up the grass of the field. And Balak bar Zippor, a Midianite, was the king of Moab at that time; without (a Midianite) being such at another time; for so was the tradition among them, to have kings from this people and from that, by turns.
And he sent unto Laban the Aramite, who was Bileam, (so called because he it was) who sought (Biluva) to swallow up (Amma) the people of the house of Israel: the son of Beor, who was insane[1] from the vastness of his knowledge; and would not spare Israel, the descendants of his sons and daughters: and the house of his habitation in Padan was at Pethor, a name signifying an interpreter of dreams. It was built in Aram upon the Phrat, in a land where the children of the people worshipped and adored him. (To him did Balak send) to call him, saying: Behold, a people hath come out of Mizraim, and, lo, they cover the face of the earth, and are encamped over against me.
But now, I entreat, come, curse this people for me, for they are stronger than I, if I may but be able to meet them, though smaller than they, and drive them from the land. For I know that he whom thou dost bless is blessed, and he whom thou dost curse is cursed.
And the elders of Moab and of Midian went, with the price of divinations sealed up in their hands, and came to Bileam, and told him the words of Balak. [JERUSALEM. And the sages of the Moabites and of the Midianites went, with sealed letters in their hands, and came to Bileam, and spake with him the words of Balak.]
And he said to them, Abide here to‑night, and I will return you word as the Lord shall speak with me. And the princes of Moab stayed with Bileam.
And the Word from before the Lord came to Bileam, and He said, What men are these who are now lodging with thee?
And Bileam said before the Lord, Balak bar Zippor, king of the Moabaee, hath sent messengers to me, saying:
Behold, a people hath come out of Mizraim, and cover the face of the land: now therefore, come, curse them for me, so that I may be able to fight and drive them away.
And the Lord said unto Bileam, Thou shalt not go with them, nor curse the people, for they are blessed of Me from the day of their fathers.
And Bileam rose up early, and said to the princes of Moab, Go unto your country, for it is not pleasing before the Lord to permit me to journey with you. ...
And the princes of Moab arose and came to Balak, and said, Bileam hath refused to come with us.
But Balak added to send (other) princes more, and nobler than they;
and they came to Bileam, and said to him: Thus saith Balak bar Zippor, Let not anything hinder thee from coming to me;
for honouring I will honour thee greatly, and whatever thou biddest me I will do. Come therefore now, and curse this people for me.
And Bileam answered the servants of Balak, and said, If Balak would give me out of his treasury a house full of silver and gold, I have no power to transgress the decree of the Word of the Lord my God, to fabricate a word either small or great.
But I entreat you to remain here this night also, that I may know what the Word of the Lord may yet speak with me.
And the Word came from before the Lord unto Bileam in the night, and said to him, If these men come to call thee, arise, go with them; only, the word that I will speak with thee, that shalt thou do.
And Bileam, arose in the morning, and saddled his ass, and went with the princes of Moab. [JERUSALEM. And Bileam arose in the morning, and made ready his ass, and went with the princes of Moab.]
But the anger of the Lord was provoked, because he would go (that he might) curse them; and the angel of the Lord stood in the way to be an adversary to him. But he sat upon his ass, and his two young men, Jannes and Jambres, were with him.
And the ass discerned the angel of the Lord standing in the way with a drawn sword in his hand, and the ass turned aside out of the road, to go into the field. And Bileam smote the ass to make her return unto the way.
And the angel of the Lord stood in a narrow path that was in the midst between vineyards, [JERUSALEM. And the angel of the Lord stood between the vineyards, a hedge (being) on this and on that side,] in the place where Jacob and Laban raised the mound, the pillar on this side and the observatory on that side, which they raised, that neither should pass that limit to do evil (to the other)
And the ass discerned the angel of the Lord, and thrust herself against the hedge, and bruised Bileam's foot by the hedge, and he smote her again; for the angel was invisible to him.
And the angel of the Lord yet passed on, and stood in a distant place, where there was no way to turn either to the right or left.
And the ass saw the angel of the Lord, and fell under Bileam; and Bileam's wrath was strong, so that he smote the ass with his staff.
Ten things were created after the world had been founded at the coming in of the Sabbath between the suns,‑the manna, the well, the rod of Mosheh, the diamond, the rainbow, the cloud of glory, the mouth of the earth, the writing of the tables of the covenant, the demons, and the speaking ass. And in that hour the Word of the Lord opened her mouth, and fitted her to speak: and she said to Bileam. What have I done to thee, that thou hast smitten me these three times?
And Bileam said to the ass, Because thou hast been false to me; if there was now but a sword in in hand, I would kill thee.
And the ass said to Bileam, Woe to thee, Bileam, thou wanting‑in‑mind when me, an unclean beast, who am to die in this world, and not to enter the world to come, thou art not able to curse; how much less (canst thou harm) the children of Abraham, Izhak, and Jakob, on account of whom the world hath been created, but whom thou art going to curse! So hast thou deceived these people, and hast said, This is not my ass, she is a loan in, my hand, and my horses remain in the pasture. But am I not thine ass upon whom thou hast ridden from thy youth unto this day? and have I been used to do thus with thee? And he said, No. [JERUSALEM. And the ass said to Bileam, Woe to thee, Bileam the wicked, wanting in understanding and wisdom! Behold, me, an unclean beast, who am to die in this world and not to enter the world to come, thou hast not power with all thy skill to curse; how much less the children of Abraham, Izhak, and Jakob, on whose account the world was created at the beginning! And why art thou going to curse them? For thou hast deceived the people, saying to them, This is not my ass: she is a loan in my hand. But am I not thy ass, upon whom thou hast ridden from thy youth unto this day? Did I indeed intend to do thus with thee? And he said to her, No.]
And the Lord unveiled the eyes of Bileam, and he beheld the angel of the Lord standing in the way, his sword unsheathed in his hand; and he bowed, and worshipped on his face.
And the angel of the Lord said to him, why hast thou smitten thine ass these three times? Behold, I have come out to withstand thee; and the ass, fearing, saw, and turned from the way. It is known before me that thou seekest to go to curse the people, a thing that is not pleasing to me.
But the ass discerned me, and turned away from me these three times: had she not turned from me, surely now I should have slain thee, and spared her alive.
And Bileam said to the angel of the Lord, I have sinned, because I knew not that thou wast standing against me in the way. But now, if it displease thee, I will go back.
But the angel of the Lord said to Bileam, Go with these men; but the word that I will tell thee that thou shalt speak. And Bileam went with the princes of Balak.
And Balak heard that Bileam was coming, and came out to meet him at a city of Moab on the border of Arnon, which is on the side of the frontier.
And Balak said to Bileam, Did I not send to call thee? Why camest thou not to me? Didst thou not indeed say that I could not do thee honour?
And Bileam said to Balak, Behold, I have come to thee; yet now am I able to say any thing to thee? But the word that the Lord shall ordain for my mouth, that I must speak.
And Bileam went with Balak, and they came to a city surrounded with walls, to the streets of the great city, the city of Sihon, which is Berosha.
And Balak slew oxen and sheep, and sent to Bileam and the princes, and those who were with them.
And at the time of the morning Balak took Bileam, and brought him up to the high place of the idol Peor; and be saw from thence the camp of Dan, which went at the rear of the people; and they were discovered under the Cloud of Glory.

Chapter 23

And Bileam, as he looked upon them, knew that strange worship was among them, and rejoiced in his heart; and he said to Balak, Build here seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.
And Balak did as Bileam had said, and Balak and Bileam offered a bullock and a ram upon an altar.
And Bileam said to Balak, Stand by thy burnt offering, and I will go, if preadventure the word of the Lord may come to meet me; and the word that shall be discovered to me, that I will declare to thee. And he went, bending as a serpent. [JERUSALEM. And Bileam went with a humbled heart.]
And the Word from before the Lord met with Bileam, who said before Him, The seven altars I have set in order, and have offered a bullock and a ram upon every altar.
And the Lord put a word in Bileam's mouth, and said, Return to Balak, and thus speak.
And he returned to him, and, behold, he was standing by his burnt‑offering, he and all the nobles of Moab.
And he took up the parable of his prophecy, and said: From Aram on Euphrates hath Balak king of the Moabaee brought me; from the mountains of the east come, curse for me the house of Jakob; come, for me make Israel small. [JERUSALEM. And he took up the parable of his prophecy, and said: Balak, the king of the Moabaee, hath brought me from Aram, from the mountains of the east: Come, curse for me the house of Jakob, come, diminish for me the tribes of the house of Israel.]
How shall I curse, (while) the Word of the Lord blesseth them? and whom shall I diminish, when the Word of the Lord increaseth them?
For, said Bileam the wicked, I look on this people who are led on for the sake of their righteous fathers, who are like the mountains, and of their mothers, who are like the hills: behold, this people alone are to possess the world, because they are not led by the laws of the nations.
And when Bileam the sinner beheld the house of Israel, a circumcised people, hidden in the dust of the desert, he said, Who can number the merits of these strong ones, or count the good works of one of the four camps of Israel? Bileam the wicked said: If the house of Israel kill me with the sword, then, it is made known to me, I shall have no portion in the world to come: nevertheless if I may but die the death of the true! O that my last end may be as the least among them! [JERUSALEM. Wherewith shall I curse the house of Jakob, when the Word of the Lord blesseth them? and how shall I diminish the house of Israel, when the Word of the Lord doth multiply them? I see this people, who are conducted through the merit of their righteous fathers, Abraham, Izhak, and Jakob, who are like the mountains, and of their four mothers, Sarah, Rivekah, Rahel, and Leah: behold, this people shall dwell alone, and not be mixed with the laws of the Gentiles. Who can number the youth of the house of Jakob, of whom it is said, They are to be like the stars of the skies? Bileam the wicked said, in the parable of his prophecy, If Israel do kill him with the sword Bileam himself declareth that he hath no portion in the world to come: but if Bileam may die as the faithful die, may his last end be as one of the least among them.]
And Balak said to Bileam, What hast thou done to me? I brought thee to curse my enemies, and, behold, blessing, thou hast blessed them.
But he answered and said, That which the Lord hath put in my mouth shall I not be careful to speak?
And Balak said to him, Come now with me where thou mayest see him from another place. Thou shalt see only the camp that goeth in his rear, but not all their camps; and curse him for me there.
And he brought him to the field of the observatory on the top of the hill, and builded seven altars, and offered a bullock and a ram on every altar.
And he said to Balak, Stand thou here by thy burnt offering and I will meet (Him) yonder.
And the Word from before the Lord met Bileam, and put a word in his mouth, and said, Return to Balak, and thus speak.
And he came to him, and, behold, he was standing by his burnt offering, and the princes of Moab with him. And Balak said to him, What hath the Lord spoken?
And he took up the parable of his prophecy, and said: Arise, Balak, and hear; listen to my words, Bar Zippor.
The Word of the living God is not as the words of men for the Lord, the Ruler of all worlds, is the unchangeable (but) man speaketh and denieth. Neither are His works like the works of the children of flesh, who consult, and then repent them of what they had decreed. But when the Lord of all worlds hath said, I will multiply this people as the stars of the heavens, and will give them to possess the land of the Kenaanites, is He not able to perform what He hath spoken? and what He hath said, can He not confirm it?
Behold, from the mouth of the Holy Word I have received the benediction, and their appointed benediction I cannot restrain from them. [JERUSALEM. And I with My Word will honour thee. Not as the word of the sons of men is the or of the living God, nor are the works of God as the works of men. Men say, and do not; they decree, but do not confirm; but God saith and performeth, He maketh decree and confirmeth it, and His decrees are established forever. Behold, I have received to bless Israel, and I cannot restrain the blessings from them.]
Bileam the wicked said, I see not among them of the house of Jakob such as worship idols: they who serve false idols are not established among the tribes of the sons of Israel. The Word of the Lord their God is their help, and the trumpets of the King Meshiha resound among them:
Unto Eloha, who redeemed and led them out of Mizraim free, belong power and exaltation, glorification and greatness.
They of the house of Jakob who use divination are not established, nor the enchanters, who enchant among the greatness (multitudes) of Israel. At this time it is said to the house of Jakob and Israel, How glorious are the miracles and wonder‑works which God hath wrought!
This people reposeth alone, and dwelleth strong as a lion, and reareth himself as an old lion. They sleep not till with great slaughter they have slain their adversaries, and taken the spoils of the slain.[JERUSALEM. I have not seen the worshippers of a lie, nor those who offer strange service, among the tribes of the sons of Israel. The Word of the Lord is with them, and the trumpet of their glorious King protecteth them. Unto God who redeemed, and brought them out from Mizraim free, belong power, and praise, and exaltation. For I see not those who perform divination in the house of Jakob, nor them who enchant with enebantments among the tribes of Israel. At this time it is said to Jakob, What bounties and comforts are prepared of the Lord to bestow upon you of the house of Jakob! Then said he in the parable of his prophecy, O happy saints, how goodly is the reward prepared for you by your Father in heaven, in the world to come! Behold, these people dwell as a lion, like the strong lion; as the lion resteth not, nor is quiet, until he hath taken and eaten flesh and drunk up blood, so this people will rest not, nor be in quiet, till they have slain their enemies, and have shed the blood of their slaughtered foes like water.]
And Balak said to Bileam, Neither curse them nor bless them.
But Bileam answered and said to Balak, Did I not tell thee at the beginning, Whatsoever the Lord speaketh, that must I do?
And Balak said to Bileam, Come, and I will now take thee to another place, if so be it may be pleasing before the Lord, that thou mayest curse him for me from thence.
And Balak led Bileam to the high place of the prospect which looketh toward Beth Jeshimoth.
And Bileam said to Balak, Erect here for me seven altars, and prepare me seven bullocks and seven rams.
And Balak did as Bileam had said, and offered a bullock and a ram upon every altar.