Drashot Maharal
דרשות מהר''ל
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Drashot_Maharal
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Drashot Maharal

Introduction



Drush Al HaTorah

























Secondly, it teaches us that even from the angle of the impulse of man being evil, there is no excuse to say it was because of it that one did not occupy oneself with Torah. As behold, the Torah rules over the evil impulse. For when he is occupied with it, the evil impulse does not rule over him, as it is found (Kiddushin 30b:8), “My son, if this wretched one encounters you, pull it into the study hall. If it is a stone it will melt, and if it is iron it will break, as it is stated, <i>Is not My word like fire, says the Lord, and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces</i> (Jeremiah 23:29).” Behold, that the fire of Torah overpowers the evil impulse to the point that it cannot rule over those that study it. And that is why [the Torah] was given with fire, to indicate that it is fire, which rules over and overpowers the evil impulse; such that this is not a claim at all. And this is [the understanding] of the matter of the two breads of chametz [leavened grain] that came with the lambs of [Shavuot], chametz being something which the Torah distanced with all of the sacrifices besides the bread of the holiday of Shavuot. And even though they were not sacrificed and offered on top of the altar, they were nevertheless called sacrifices, like the other grain offerings. And, if so, why were they presented specifically with chametz? However, the reason for the thing is that chametz is the evil impulse, which is the leavening in the dough that prevents [proper behavior], from which it is truly proper to distance oneself, so long as there is any concern in the world – even a very distant concern – that one come to sin on account of it. However, when there is no concern at all, it should not be distanced. Hence God commanded to offer chametz, which is the evil impulse, on [Shavuot], the day of the giving of the Torah, and on no other, because the Torah does not permit it to rule over man. That is as we say in Kiddushin (30b:3-5), “The Sages taught, <i>And you shall place [vesamtem]</i> (Deuteronomy 11:18) – <i>sam tam</i> [a perfect elixir]. The Torah is compared to an elixir of life. There is a parable that illustrates this: A person hit his son with a strong blow and placed a bandage on his wound. And he said to him, ‘My son, as long as this bandage is on your wound, eat what you enjoy and drink what you enjoy, and bathe in either hot water or cold water, and you do not need to be afraid. But if you take it off, the wound will become gangrenous.’  So too the Holy One, Blessed be He, said to Israel, ‘My children, I created an evil inclination, and I created Torah as its antidote. If you are occupied with Torah, you will not be given over into the hand of the evil impulse, as it is stated, <i>If you do well, shall it not be lifted up</i> (Genesis 4:7). But if you are not occupied with Torah, you are given over to its power, as it is stated, <i>yet sin crouches at the door</i>.’ So it is that someone [submerged by his] evil impulse will make the Torah ownerless. But even though the power of the evil impulse is great, the power of the Torah is greater, as it was said, <i>Is not My word like fire</i>, such that the Torah negates its power. And, if so, this too is not a claim or justification at all.

Drush Al Hamitzvot



Drush L'Shabbat T'Shuva















































And in the last chapter of Yoma (85b), we learned [in a mishnah]: Transgressions between a person and the Omnipresent, Yom Kippur atones; transgressions between a person and his fellow, Yom Kippur does not atone until he appeases his fellow. Rabbi Elazar ben Azarya expounded, “’From all your sins you shall be cleansed before the Lord’ (Leviticus 16:30) – transgressions between a person and the Omnipresent, Yom Kippur atones; transgressions between a person and his fellow, Yom Kippur does not atone until he appeases his fellow.” Rabbi Akiva said, “How fortunate are you, Israel; before Whom are you purified, and Who purifies you? Your Father in Heaven, as it is stated (Ezekiel 36:25), ‘And I will sprinkle purifying water upon you, etc. and from all your idols, will I cleanse you.’ And it stated (Jeremiah 17:13), ‘The ritual bath of Israel is God.’ Just as a ritual bath purifies the impure, so too, the Holy One, Blessed be He, purifies Israel.” To here [is the Gemara]. But it can be asked, why does Yom Kippur not atone for transgressions between a person and his fellow? And if it is because he needs to appease him, one must also [go through the preliminary step and] repent for transgressions between a person and the Omnipresent and appease Him. Moreover, sometimes the one that he transgresses against has gone overseas and he doesn’t know where he is, or he becomes sick and is not able to go after him. Nevertheless, Rabbi Akiva explained that this thing that Yom Kippur atones is only about transgressions between a person and the Omnipresent. That is why he said, “How fortunate are you, Israel; before Whom are you purified.” That is to say that that which Israel is purified on Yom Kippur is because Israel clings to Him, may He be elevated, as it is written (Deuteronomy 4:4), “But you, the ones clinging to the Lord, your God.” And it is about this that he said, “How fortunate are you Israel; before Whom are you purified.” For there is no level greater than this. And he added to say, “And Who purifies you? Your Father in Heaven.” As because Israel completely clings to Him, may He be elevated, this thing itself is the removal and the taking away of sin from Israel. For since sin is not applicable to Him, may He be elevated, sin is removed from those that cling to Him. And that is why it is on Yom Kippur. Because there is affliction of the spirit and the removal of physicality from Israel, so Israel clings to Him, may He be elevated; and this thing removes the sin from Israel. And that is why he said, “Just as a ritual bath purifies the impure, so too, the Holy One, Blessed be He, purifies Israel.” For a ritual bath purifies the impure when he completely clings to it, without anything intervening at all, since impurity is not applicable to a ritual bath. Hence when one clings to it completely without anything intervening, he is removed from impurity. And so does the Holy One, blessed be He, purify Isarel. For they completely cling to Him, may He be elevated, without anything intervening or separating at all; and He, may He be elevated, is removed from sin. Hence Israel becomes pure by way of the Holy One, blessed be He, Himself. And that is why it is specifically transgressions between a person and the Omnipresent, on account of which he was distanced from God, may He elevated, that God, may He be elevated, atones for, by way of Israel clinging to Him. But Yom Kippur does not atone for a sin that is from the angle of his fellow, and not from the angle of God, may He be blessed. And about this he said, “How fortunate are you Israel” – about this total clinging without anything intervening at all, to the point that they are made pure from Him. And fortunate are we and fortunate is our portion in our purification in this pure and holy Place, in which [even] the supernal angels are not purified, as is known to the Sages of Understanding. 

Drush L'Shabbat HaGadol

