Mishneh LaMelech on Mishneh Torah, Woman Suspected of Infidelity
משנה למלך על משנה תורה, הלכות סוטה
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_LaMelech_on_Mishneh_Torah,_Woman_Suspected_of_Infidelity
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh LaMelech on Mishneh Torah, Woman Suspected of Infidelity



Chapter 1



Halakhah 1



Halakhah 2



Halakhah 3



Halakhah 4



Halakhah 5



Halakhah 6



Halakhah 7



Halakhah 8



Halakhah 9



Halakhah 10



Halakhah 11



Halakhah 12



Halakhah 13



Halakhah 14

A woman whose husband becomes jealous of her...
..
..
.

.
..

And if you ask what are the practical implications of all this discussion, whether the woman who only becomes defiled later drinks, as it is clear that she does not drink?  For we have already established that a widow married to a High Priest or divorcee/chalutza married to an ordinary Priest do not drink it, since we require the wife to be suitable for marriage. And this is the same as Rashi wrote in the beginning of Chapter 4 "Arusa" (of bSotah), and even applies to minor prohibitions. For example, if someone who does not have already a wife and children (marries an aylonit), she does not drink because she is not "suitable for marriage." And all the more so for this one who was defiled, who is Biblically prohibited to him, as it is written, (Deuteronomy 24:4) "since she has been defiled." 
And if you say that the only cases that are excluded are cases where she was unsuitable at the time of her acquisition, but if, at the time that he acquired her she was suitable for marriage, even if afterwards she became prohibited to him, we consider her suitable for marriage; This is not the case, for Rashi writes in the Chapter "Arusa" (Sotah 26) on that which we say - 'the wife of a saris drinks' and these are his words: "It is discussing a saris chamah who is permitted to stay married to her, but not about a saris adam who is prohibited to stay married to her." What is the question? We might try to apply the rule to a saris adam who became a saris after he married her, but Rashi certainly holds that even if he married her in a permitted state, any case where she later becomes unsuitable for marriage, she does not drink. However, this proof can be rejected, because there that text serves to teach us that sex with ("shechivat") a saris is considered sex, and we apply the rule that sex with the husband precedes the paramour's.
Indeed, in truth, from Rashi's words on our Mishna at the beginning of Chapter "Arusa" it could be inferred that anyone who was suitable for marriage at the time of her marriage would drink, for behold he did write, and these are his words: "The wife of a saris, for example, if he became a saris after he married her, where the husband's sex preceded the paramour's." And the Tosafists sustain this opinion of Rashi's, for they hold that anyone who became a saris by human means, even if they drank a dose of sterility medication, is forbidden to enter the congregation. And thus they wrote there, at s.v. "Eshet." And this leads to a difficulty, for this being written not about saris chamah, would indicate that he is prohibited to maintain her! Indeed, in truth, these words of Rashi's on our mishnah are difficult and they contradict the way he interpreted the gemara. The Rav in Chiddushi Halachot wrote that it was a copyist's error, and it is as I explained before (to be found below in Chapter 2 of these laws, Law 6, see there). 
And in any case, it appears to me that the law is a true law, that even if he married her in a permitted way, if afterwards she is not suitable for marriage, she does not drink. And the proof is from what we say in the Yerushalmi at the beginning of Chapter "Arusa" and our Rabbi has brought it in Chapter 2 of these laws, Law 11, and here are his words: "If he had children and they died between the instigation of jealousy and the seclusion, she has already become fitting for the drinking, and he makes her drink." This implies that this is specifically only when they died after the instigation of jealousy, but if they died before the instigation of jealousy, she does not drink. And this is true even if he married her in a permissible way. And given this, we have returned to what we wrote earlier, that it is obvious that a woman who was defiled, even afterwards, does not drink. 