Ran on Avodah Zarah
ר"ן על עבודה זרה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ran on Avodah Zarah



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b









"Regarding the 'ball' and 'Plutah' (idols), the Gemara explains that these are certainly worshipped, because of their importance, they were taken in hand as objects of veneration. The Gemara teaches regarding the Mishnah: If they are worshipped once a year, what is the reasoning of the Rabbanan? This means that since it does not state 'and the Sages say that it is only worshipped by someone holding a stick,' it implies that they agree it is worshipped. And we explain: Rabbi Yitzchak bar Rabbi Yosi said in the name of Rabbi Yochanan: In Rabbi Meir’s locale, they worshipped them once a year, and because Rabbi Meir is concerned with the minority, he decreed concerning other places because of that locale. The Rabbanan, who are not concerned with the minority, did not decree concerning other places because of that local.. The Ramban z"l explained that this means: Rabbi Meir, who is concerned with the minority, holds that any place whose customs are unknown is forbidden by law, because since Rabbi Meir is concerned with the minority, we must be concerned that perhaps they follow the custom of his place, even though that place is a minority in relation to all the places known to us, where these objects are not worshipped. Similarly, all the statues found on the way are forbidden by law for this reason. And since the majority of the world is forbidden by law according to Rabbi Meir, he decreed even in places where we know they are not worshipped because of the prohibition that extends from that place. Since the majority of the world is forbidden according to Rabbi Meir, he decreed regarding the minority because of the majority. However, the Rabbanan, who are not concerned with the minority, do not prohibit the world because of Rabbi Meir’s locale alone. These are his words, z"l..  But the language of 'he decreed concerning other places because of that place' does not sit well with me, and what he also says, that every place whose custom is unknown is forbidden by law according to Rabbi Meir, is not clear to me. For although we hear from Rabbi Meir that he is concerned with the minority in cases like a minor or a minor girl (Yevamot 61a), where he says they do not perform chalitzah nor yibbum lest they be found to be a eunuch or an aylonit (barren woman), that is because it is a common minority in every place. But to hold a prohibition from one place to another because of Rabbi Meir’s locale is unfounded, since all the places known to us do not follow his custom. Even if you say this minority is similar to the minority of eunuchs and barren women, even so, Rabbi Meir should not be concerned here, because it is stated in the first chapter of Chullin (11a): 'From where do we know that the Rabbis say to follow the majority?' We are puzzled and respond, 'From the verse, "After the majority, you shall incline" (Exodus 23:2).' The Gemara asks about a case where the majority is present before us, like nine stores or the Sanhedrin; we do not question it. But when we question, it is regarding a majority that is not present before us, such as a minor or a minor girl. Therefore, concerning a majority that is present before us, even Rabbi Meir agrees with it, for the reasoning is that since the majority is known before us, it nullifies the minority and renders it as if it does not exist..  And here too, the majority of places where idols are not worshipped is known before us and is present before us. Therefore, the minority should be nullified, and we should not be concerned about unknown places because of Rabbi Meir’s locale. Thus, it seems to me that the correct explanation is that, according to Rabbi Meir, all the places in the world are permitted by law, even in places where the custom is unknown. However, since Rabbi Meir is generally concerned with the minority, it indicates that he does not consider the minority as if it does not exist. Therefore, he decreed concerning other places so that they would not err in his locale. And even though it is a minority, it is proper to be concerned about its potential harm. But the Rabbanan, who are not concerned with the minority, hold that the minority is as if it does not exist, and such language is used by them at the end of Kiddushin (80a) and in the chapter 'Kol Hayad' (18b). Therefore, they do not decree on the entire world because of a concern for the minority’s harm.. And thus, the language of 'he decreed concerning other places because of that place' makes sense. After this, it is stated: Rav Yehuda said in the name of Shmuel: 'We taught this regarding the statue of kings,' meaning that when the king dies, they make a statue of him at the city gates as a memorial. In such a case, Rabbi Meir prohibited it because they would come to worship it out of affection. Rav Yehuda’s statement in the name of Shmuel seems to be explaining the Mishnah, saying we need not say that Rabbi Meir and the Rabbanan argue whether to decree concerning other places because of that place, but they only argue concerning that place itself. This is taught regarding the statues of kings, specifically in large cities, as Rava concludes. Certainly, these statues were not made for worship but only for adornment. However, Rabbi Meir was concerned about the minority of people in that place who would accept it as a god. This is the meaning of 'because they are worshipped once a year,' meaning since we are concerned about the minority, we must be concerned that perhaps one person might mistakenly worship it once a year. The Rabbanan, who are not concerned with the minority, permitted it."

Daf 18a



Daf 18b










And he (Rabban Gamliel) would say to them: 'Did you see it like this or like that?' This means he was testing them to see if their words (testimony) were accurate. And we raise an objection: Is this even permitted? After all, it is written 'You shall not make with Me,' which prohibits making likenesses of My servants (the heavenly bodies). And we answer: Abaye said: The Torah only forbade making likenesses of the heavenly bodies that can be made exactly as they are.  This means that as for the celestial servants above, which cannot truly be replicated, only a likeness or resemblance can be made, and that is permitted.


And of seven, he shall not make, for it is like that of the Temple. And even of other types of metals, even though they are not gold, they are valid in the Temple, as we learn in "Hakometz Rabbah" (28b) from a generalization, specification, and generalization. But of wood, it is permitted, because it is not valid in the Temple, as the specification explicitly mentions metals.  And we raise a difficulty: Is it permitted to make representations of things that cannot be made exactly like them? But it was taught in a Baraita: "You shall not make with Me," meaning you shall not make in the likeness of My attendants that serve before Me in the heavens. From this, we learn that even the upper attendants are also forbidden.  And we answer: Abaye said, "The Torah only forbade the likeness of the four faces together," meaning the faces of an ox, a man, a lion, and an eagle on one creature, similar to the holy beings, as it is written, "You shall not make with Me," which refers to those that dwell with Me.  And we raise a difficulty: If so, should the face of a man alone be permitted? Why then was it taught in a Baraita: "All faces are permitted except for the face of a man"?  And we answer: Rav Huna, the son of Rav Yehoshua, said: I heard from the lecture of Abaye that "You shall not make with Me" means "You shall not make Me," i.e., the form in which I appear to the prophets.  And we raise a difficulty: Are the other attendants permitted? But it was taught in a Baraita: "You shall not make with Me," meaning you shall not make the likeness of My attendants that serve before Me in the heavens, such as the Ophanim, Seraphim, holy beings, and ministering angels. This refers to the form in which they appear in prophetic visions, which is a man with wings.  And we answer: Abaye said, "The Torah only forbade the attendants of the upper realm," as it is written, "with Me." But the sun and the moon are in the lower realm.  And we raise a difficulty: Are the ones in the lower realm permitted? But it was taught in a Baraita: "That are in the heavens," to include the sun, moon, stars, and constellations, "That are above," to include the ministering angels. When that Baraita was taught, it was referring to worshipping them.  If it was about worshipping, then even the smallest worm should be included. Indeed, that is so. And from the end of the verse, we derive: "That are on the earth," to include seas and rivers, "That are below," to include the smallest worm.  And we raise a difficulty: Is merely making these forms (without worshipping them) permitted? But it was taught in a Baraita: "You shall not make with Me," meaning you shall not make the likeness of My attendants that serve before Me in the heavens, such as the sun, moon, stars, and constellations.  And we answer: Rabban Gamliel’s case is different because others made them for him, i.e., idol worshippers.  But in the case of Rav Yehuda, others also made it for him, meaning an image on a ring that he would wear. And Shmuel said to Rav Yehuda, "Sharp one, remove its eye," meaning deface its form. And we answer: There, it was a protruding seal, and because of suspicion, so that people would not say he is worshipping it. As it was taught in a Baraita: A ring with a protruding seal, meaning its form—it is forbidden to wear it, but permitted to seal with it, because when one seals, the seal sinks into the wax and is not visible from the outside. If the seal is sunken, it is permitted to wear it, but forbidden to seal with it, because when one seals, the seal becomes protruding.  And later, we raise a difficulty: If so, why not be concerned about suspicion in Rabban Gamliel’s case as well? And we answer: Are we concerned about suspicion? For there was that synagogue in "Shaf Veyativ" in Nehardea, meaning it was situated in the place known as Nehardea. And some say they took stones and earth from Jerusalem with them when they were exiled, and they built it there.  This is what "Shaf Veyativ" refers to: It was taken from here and settled there, as it is written: "For Your servants desire its stones..." And they erected an image (statue) there. And Shmuel's father and Levi would enter there and pray, and they were not concerned about suspicion. The public is different.  But Rabban Gamliel was an individual? Since he was a prince, many people were often around him. Or, if you want, say that it was in parts, meaning of segments, and it was not assembled except during the examination of witnesses, and on other days, it was not seen, so there was no suspicion.