Bava Batra
בבא בתרא
Sefaria Community Translation
http://www.sefaria.org



Bava Batra

Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a

Mishnah: Partners agree to make a division in a courtyard; they build a wall in the middle. 
In a place where the custom is to build with rough stone, smooth stones, half-bricks, or bricks, they must build according to the custom of the land. ...
If rough-stones, he gives 3 hand-breadths  (9 cm/hand-breadth) and the other gives 3 hand-breadths. 
If smooth stones, he gives 2.5 hand-breadths and the other gives 2.5 hand-breadths. ...
If half-bricks, he gives 2 hand-breadths and the other gives 2 hand-breadths.
If bricks, he gives 1.5 hand-breadths and the other gives 1.5 hand-breadths....
Therefore, if the wall falls, the place where the wall and the materials were will belong to both of them.
Similarly in a garden; In a place where the custom is to build a fence, you can force the other to build.
Oppositely in a wheat field, in a place where there isn't a custom to build a fence, you cannot force the other. Rather, if you want to build your own wall, build the wall on your side with a marking facing outwards.
Therefore, if the wall falls, the place where the wall and the bricks were will belong to you.
If both of you want to build a wall, both should mark their sides.
Therefore, if the wall falls, the land and the bricks will belong to both of them:
Gemarah: They thought "division" means wall.
They show a case, 
"A wall in a vineyard falls. He says to him, "Fix it." He fixes it, and it falls again. He says to him, "Fix it."

Daf 2b

He gives up hope and doesn't fix it. This creates a forbidden mixture, and he is obligated for the damages." ...
What is the reason? They wanted to (build a wall), behold, if they don't want to (build a wall), you can't obligate the other.
We see that damage from sight is not real damage....
And if you will say that...
"division" means separation, as it is written...
in Bamidbar 31:43, a congregation divides spoils of war, and since they agreed, either can force the other....
We see from this that damage from sight is real damage....
If so, (when the Mishnah says), "they want to make a separation," (it should say), "they wanted to divide."
Rather, if it means "wall",
(instead of), "build a wall," (it should say), "build it."
If it taught "it", I would have said, "(you) just (need) markers." Therefore it teaches (division means) 
"wall".
Build the wall in the middle and etc.
It's obvious!
No, it's necessary. A friend convinces another to build a wall.
You might think that he can say,
"I was convinced that I would loose air flow, but not the ground space."
Therefore it teaches damage from sight is not real damage.
(Rav Nachman: sign, garden, wall, force, split, window)
Come and hear.
"Similarly in a garden."
A garden is different. Rav Aba says in the name of Rav Ava in the name of Huna in the name of Rav, "It is forbidden for a man to stand in a friend's field in the hour it is blooming."
"Similarly" (refers to)
the kind of bricks.
Come and hear,
"A wall in a courtyard falls and you can obligate him to build until four amot."
A fall is different.
What was he asking?
The end of the mishnah you need
up to four amot. Above that you cannot force him.
Come and hear,
"You can force him to build a door in a gate house in a courtyard.
We learn from here
that damage from sight is real damage.
(No) Damage from the public is different.
And an individual no?
Come and hear,
"You can't (force a) division in a courtyard unless he has four amot and the other has 4 amot.
If there is enough for both then you can force. Is this not wth a wall?
No, it's just a marker.
Come and hear,
"A wall must be four amot above, below, or across a window.
It is taught in a baraita,
"If (the wall is) above (the window,) it should be raised (four amot) so that one cannot hang (from the wall) and look into the window. If (the wall is) below (the window, it should be lowered four amot) so that one cannot stand on the wall and see into the window.

Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a
































































Charity is considered equivalent to all the Mitzvot.

Daf 9b



Daf 10a











...And Turnus Rufus, the evil, asked this question to Rabbi Akiva
...If your God loves the impoverished, then why doesn't he support them?
...[Rabbi Akiva] responded
...So that we should be saved through them (the impoverished) from the judgement of Gehinnom
...[Turnus Rufus] responded
...the very opposite, they (the supporters) should be condemned to Gehinnom?
...I will give you a parable to what this is comparable to,
..to a king of flesh and blood who becomes angry at his servant and imprisons him and commands that he should not be given food or drink. Then one man goes and gives him food and drink. When the king hears won't he be angry at him?
...And you are referred to as servants as it written
"For the sons of Israel are my servants" (Leviticus 25, 55)
Rabbi Akiva responded to him:
I will give you a parable to what this is comparable to,
to a king of flesh and blood that becomes angry at his child and imprisons him, and commands that he should not be given food or drink.  One man goes and gives him food and drink. When the king hears, won't he send him a gift?
And we are called sons, as it is written
"You are children to Hashem, your God." (Deuternomy 14, 1)
[Turnus Rufus] responded
you are called sons and you are called servants. When you do the will of God you are called children and when you don't do the will of God you are called servants. And now you are not doing the will of God 
[Rabbi Akiva] responded: this is what is meant
"Won't you give your bread to the hungry and bring the desperate poor to your house?" (Isaiah 58, 7)
When [do] the desperate poor [need to be] brought home?
Nowadays
and it says
"Won't you give your bread to the poor?"

Daf 10b



Daf 11a

















Our Rabbis taught:
It is related of King Monobaz  that he dissipated all his own hoards and the hoards of his fathers in years of scarcity. His brothers and his father's household came in a deputation to him and said to him,
'Your father saved money and added to the treasures of his fathers, and you are squandering them.
' He replied: 
'My fathers stored up below and I am storing above, as it says, 
Truth springs out of the earth and righteousness looks down from heaven. (Psalms 85,12)
My fathers stored in a place which can be tampered with, but I have stored in a place which cannot be tampered with, as it says,
Righteousness and judgment are the foundation of his throne. (Psalms 89,15)
My fathers stored something which produces no fruits, but I have stored something which does produce fruits, as it is written,
Say ye of the righteous [zaddik] that it shall be well with them, for they shall eat of the fruit of their doings. (Isaiah 3,10)
My fathers gathered treasures of money, but I have gathered treasures of souls, as it is written, 
The fruit of the righteous [zaddik] is a tree of life, and he that is wise wins souls. (Proverbs 11,30)
My fathers gathered for others and I have gathered for myself, as it says,
And for thee it shall be righteousness [zedakah]. (Deuteronomy 24,13) 
My fathers gathered for this world, but I have gathered for the future world, as it says,
Thy righteousness [zedakah] shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall be thy rearward. (Isaiah 58,8)



















































Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b

































































A store which is in a courtyard: The [members] of the courtyard can protest and say to him, we cannot sleep from all of the noise of those going in and out.
But he may make vessels, go out and sell them in the marketplace.
And they cannot protest and say to him, I cannot sleep from the sound of the hammer, or the sound of the millstone or the sound of the youngsters. 
Gemara:
What is the difference between the first part of the Mishnah and the last part?
Abaye said
The last part refers to a different courtyard.
Rava said to him:
If this were so, it should have taught
that in a different courtyard it is permitted.
Rather, Rava said: 

Daf 21a

Apply the last part to the children of the school, from the time of the decree of Yehoshua ben Gamla and on.
For Rav Yehuda said in the name of Rav:
However, remember this man for good, namely Yehoshua ben Gamla, for if not for him, Torah would have been forgotten from Israel.
For originally, whoever had a father, [the father] would teach him Torah; whoever had no father would not learn Torah.
What was expounded?
(Deuteronomy 11:19) "And ye shall teach them (<i>'otam'</i>)."
"And you yourselves (<i>'atem'</i>) shall teach."
They decreed that teachers of children should be set up in Jerusalem.
What was expounded?
(Isaiah 2:3) "For out of Zion shall go forth the law."
But still, whoever had a father, [the father] would bring him up [to Jerusalem] and teach him; whoever didn't have a father would not go up and learn.
They decreed that [teachers] should be set up in each and every district.
And they would bring them in at around age 16 or 17, and anyone whose teacher was angry at him, [the teacher] would kick him out.
Until Yehoshua ben Gamla came and decreed that teachers of children should be set up in each and every province and in each and every city, and [that] they are brought in at around age 6 or 7.

Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b



Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b



Daf 27a



Daf 27b



Daf 28a



Daf 28b



Daf 29a



Daf 29b



Daf 30a



Daf 30b



Daf 31a



Daf 31b



Daf 32a



Daf 32b



Daf 33a



Daf 33b



Daf 34a



Daf 34b



Daf 35a



Daf 35b



Daf 36a



Daf 36b



Daf 37a



Daf 37b



Daf 38a



Daf 38b



Daf 39a



Daf 39b



Daf 40a



Daf 40b



Daf 41a



Daf 41b



Daf 42a



Daf 42b



Daf 43a



Daf 43b



Daf 44a



Daf 44b



Daf 45a



Daf 45b



Daf 46a



Daf 46b



Daf 47a



Daf 47b



Daf 48a



Daf 48b



Daf 49a



Daf 49b



Daf 50a



Daf 50b



Daf 51a



Daf 51b



Daf 52a



Daf 52b



Daf 53a



Daf 53b



Daf 54a



Daf 54b


Rav Papa said:
[wide enough for] a plougher with his team of oxen to go and turn around.