Marit HaAyin on Pirkei Avot
מראית העין על משנה אבות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Marit HaAyin on Pirkei Avot



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5



Mishnah 6



Mishnah 7



Mishnah 8



Mishnah 9



Mishnah 10



Mishnah 11



Mishnah 12



Mishnah 13



Mishnah 14



Mishnah 15



Mishnah 16



Mishnah 17



Mishnah 18



Mishnah 19


<b>The sages taught in the language of the Mishnah, etc.:</b> It is known that the holy Rabbi (R. Yehudah HaNasi) composed five chapters in Tractate Avot, corresponding to <i>hey</i> (the Hebrew letter that has a numerical equivalent of five), which hints to the Divine Presence, within which is the oral Torah. And one who fulfills the words of Avot is able to fulfill the Torah and cling to the Divine Presence. It also hints that Avot is Wisdom, Strength and Beauty, which bring forth the five kindnesses to the Divine Presence 'on the day on which it will be spoken about Her.' And likewise did our rabbi, the Rambam, and our rabbi, Ovadia (Bartenura), may their memory be blessed, only comment on five chapters in their commentaries on the Mishnah. And the commentary that is found in the Rambam's commentary, may his memory be blessed, on this sixth chapter is not from the Rambam, may his memory be blessed, as the observer can see from the style of the language. It is copied from Rashi's commentary on this chapter, may his memory be blessed, even if it is slightly different. However, the Rambam only commented on five chapters, whereas later editors took from Rashi's commentary on this chapter and placed it in the Rambam's commentary, may his memory be blessed. And this is obvious. And go and see how many hints there are in these five chapters by the genius and pious man (Rambam), see there in the book Maaseh Rokach.<br><b>And the rabbi,</b> our teacher, Rabbi Yosef Chayun, may his memory be blessed, in the book, Milei DeAvot, a commentary on this tractate that he composed in the city of Lisbon in the year 5230 (1470), wrote: Because the custom spread in the past to read this tractate on the Shabbats between Pesach and the holiday of Shavuot, one chapter each Shabbat, the sixth Shabbat was left without a chapter. [Hence] the earlier ones put together statements from our Rabbis, may their memory be blessed, gathered from the Talmud and the Midrash, which speak about the greatness of the Torah, and made a chapter out of them. So they called it the Chapter of the Acquisition of the Torah and designated that it be read on the Shabbat prior to the holiday of Shavuot on which the Torah was given. And the redactors of this chapter began it with the phrase, "The sages taught in the language of the Mishnah," to make known that this chapter is not from the actual tractate that the holy Rabbi composed, but that it is rather a collection from our Rabbis, may their memory be blessed, in the language of the Mishnah. To here are his [words].