Seder Ma'amadot
סדר מעמדות
The Koren Jerusalem Bible
https://www.sefaria.org/Ezekiel.25?ven=The_Koren_Jerusalem_Bible&vhe=Miqra_according_to_the_Masorah&lang=bi&with=all&lang2=en

Seder Ma'amadot



Day of Week 1



Day of Week 2



Day of Week 3



Day of Week 4



Day of Week 5





(25) And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods. (26) And I will make them and the places round about my hill a blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in its season; they will be showers of blessing. (27) And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth shall yield her increase, and they shall be secure in their land, and shall know that I am the Lord, when I have broken the bars of their yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of those that enslaved them. (28) And they shall no more be a prey to the nations, nor shall the beast of the land devour them; but they shall dwell in safety, and none shall make them afraid. (29) And I will raise up for them a plantation for renown, and they shall be no more consumed with hunger in the land, nor suffer any more the insult of the nations. (30) Thus shall they know that I the Lord their God am with them, and that they, the house of Yisra᾽el are my people, says the Lord God. (31) But you my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your God, says the Lord God.

(1) To the chief Musician upon the Gittit, Of Asaf. (2) Sing aloud to God our strength: make a joyful noise to the God of Ya῾aqov. (3) Raise a song, sound the timbrel, the sweet lyre, with the harp. (4) Blow a shofar at the new moon, at the full moon on our feast day. (5) For this is a statute for Yisra᾽el, an ordinance of the God of Ya῾aqov. (6) This he ordained in Yosef for testimony, when he went out over the land of Miżrayim. I heard the language of him whom I had not known, saying, (7) I removed his shoulder from the burden: his hands are freed from the basket. (8) Thou didst call in trouble, and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the secret place of thunder: I proved thee at the waters of Meriva. (Sela.) (9) Hear, O my people, and I will testify against thee: O Yisra᾽el, if thou wilt hearken to me: (10) there shall be no strange god among thee; nor shalt thou worship any foreign deity. (11) I am the Lord thy God who brought thee out of the land of Miżrayim: open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. (12) But my people would not hearken to my voice; and Yisra᾽el would none of me. (13) So I let them go after the stubbornness of their hearts, that they might follow their own counsels. (14) Oh that my people would hearken to me, and Yisra᾽el would walk in my ways! (15) I would soon subdue their enemies, and turn my hand against their adversaries. (16) Let the haters of the Lord cringe before him: and their punishment should last forever. (17) But he would feed him with the finest of the wheat: and with honey out of the rock I will satisfy thee.