Olat Reiyah
עולת ראיה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Olat Reiyah

Introduction



Essays on Prayer

The Constant Prayer of the Soul



A Guide to Prayer and its Elements



Prayer and Torah



Paths of Action in Prayer



Modeh Ani



Tzizit



Tefillin



Ma Tovu



Adon Olam



Yigdal



Netilat Yadayim and Asher Yatzar




It is revealed and known before Your Throne of Glory, that if one of them were ruptured, or if one of them were blocked, it would be impossible to exist and stand in Your Presence even for a short while: All living creatures, whose tasks are all done with the necessity of nature, without free choice, it is not a wonder when they are situated in their living conditions, which require so much precision. Because thus is nature in its entirety, which operates within its laws with the purpose of precision. However the great wonder is regarding man, that his free choice affixes the seal of self-will on his life, and therefore the natural laws do not maintain within him so much their tasks, and nevertheless in regards to the matter of maintaining life, the Creator did not grant man's free will any power to dissuade the fundamental processes from their paths. And since it is known before His Throne of Glory, that if the laws of life in their nature would not be precise enough to act upon man, his natural life could not stand, therefore [God] negated the power of will and freedom of choice from control in the natural, animalistic life. And [God] did not give man control over closing and opening his body's organs, which are impressed in the nature of physical work of life, since that if they were to change the natural ways, from their foundational laws, a person could not live and subsist for even a short while, with the destruction of the stability of nature with its control over the body.

Blessings of the Torah







<b>The priestly blessing:</b> The section of the priestly blessing is adjacent to the blessing over the Torah because the foundation of the blessing over the Torah relates to the characteristic quality of our communal inheritance, which stands above anything that can disturb or prevent the great bliss which must perforce dwell within our soul. And we find this characteristic quality — which is to establish Torah in the Jewish people — in the holiness of the priests, which is primarily in order to establish the light of the Torah in the Jewish people: <i>They shall teach Your law to Jacob and Your Torah to Israel</i> (Deuteronomy 33:10). And by way of the institutionalization of the holiness of the priesthood within the people, the entire people will afterwards all come to be a kingdom of priests and a holy nation (alluding to Exodus 19:6). Hence there is a strong connection here between the essence of the blessing over the Torah and the more general content of the priestly blessing.
<b>May the Lord bless you and protect you.</b> With mortals, protection must necessarily come first over that which exists; and afterward blessing, addition, and expansion. For only when [protected bounty] already exists and is assured to continue, only then can the content of the protection also extend over [the additional bounty that comes through the blessing]. But it is not like this with God's blessing. The blessing is itself that which extends the protection along with it. So everything blessed from the Heavens is also protected through the blessing itself. And that is why the blessing precedes the protection: May the Lord bless you and protect you.
<b>May the Lord shine His countenance upon you and give you grace.</b> The shining of God's countenance is the appearance of the supernal holiness that stands above all the boundaries of creation and the systems of actions, characteristics, and thoughts found in all the worlds. The light of the Torah gives off this supernal enlightenment, which no created power can take without the singular kindness of the supernal grace of God's light. <i>The Lord bestows grace and glory; He does not withhold His bounty from those who live without blame</i> (Psalms 84:12). Hence the grace is connected to the shining of God's countenance upon the one who is blessed with the blessing of His light. May the Lord shine His countenance upon you and give you grace.
<b>May the Lord lift His countenance upon you and give you peace.</b> God's blessing, which raises man to a level of supernal eminence surely adds many obligations upon him in the ways of holiness, refinement of character traits, and the purification of life. And according to the spiritual accomplishment and the blessing of the soul in its spirituality, so too does the great demand for the justification of actions also grow. This is to the point that without the kindnesses of God, who remembers His creations with mercy and who knows their [evil] impulse and the heaviness of physical nature, which at the end of the day prevents full purity — without this, there would be absolutely no chance of standing in front of the breadth of the supernal ethical demand that comes as a precise consequence of the true blessing. About this, we therefore recite the blessing, May the Lord lift His countenance upon you [which can also mean indulge you] — and bring you beyond the letter of the law [what should be expected from you] in your elevation to sense and feel the depths of holiness and its great obligations. However, you cannot prevent the storm of the soul, given that it senses that its obligations are not being fulfilled. And the denial of inner peace is a major impediment to the fulfillment of the blessing in its fullness and goodness. Hence the blessing continues its bounty: and give you peace; that peace be brought back to the soul. As the whole point of this lifting of the countenance/favoring is to remove the impediment of the fall of the spirit that is due to the perspective of the impossibility of fulfilling the complete obligation in the greatness of the holiness of its sublimity. But in the future, the joy of holiness will be established, to grow in the gladness of the righteous before the face of the Lord who is Peace (alluding to Lamentations 2:19) that shines ever more brightly until the height of noonday (alluding to Proverbs 4:18).










<b>And the bringing of peace between a person and his fellow.</b> Peace—how much of the world’s settlement and repair is in it! How much of the transient life, so ephemeral, does it repair—through its influence, through the mutual assistance found with it, through the good relations that it instills into personal life and into public life! But all of this is only to be considered like a small fragment beside the inner splendor that the light of peace has. The ideal of peace, which is the name of God, touches the heavenly completion that embraces all the eternities, that unites all that is into one total existence, tremendous, noble, and lofty, per the counsel of <i>the Pure of Understanding</i> (Job 37:16), <i>God, of awesome splendor</i> (Job 37:22). Thus, in bringing peace among people there is a portion of the heavenly, eternal light that illuminates all forever, of the holy light of the King whose name is Peace, and this is the basis of “the principal״ that ״continues… into the world to come״(Mishnah Peah 1:1). [Whereas] the agreeable societal purpose which results from the principle of peace prevailing among people is the result of the fruits that a person consumes in this world (see Mishnah Peah 1:1).

Morning Blessings

"My God": This holy calling-out which every individual securely calls out to THE ETERNAL as their specific, personal God, is an expression of the soul in its primal state.  It knows itself and its power; knows that its strength, existence, aliveness, pleasure, and salvation is none other than the living God. It knows that there is no divsion in the light that reaches the upper, hidden Place. And even if a multitude of endless tens of thousands of souls and creatures and creations and countless worlds are all full of the true God's light, the divine aliveness pours with endless love into each of them in the same measure, as if there were just one, single soul in the entire universe, into whom all the rays of light enter. And there is no darkness or shadow-of-death in that shining, no interference from any obstructions, from any corruption, from any sin or transgression, that could stop up the Source-light that pours into the inwardness of every soul, out of whose powerful strength comes the first 










The soul will grow in our innards, the light of life that is in our innards will expand, when we know, that all of existence entirely and its full life are one unit, that the tendentious completeness comes from gathering all its portions together. The man who is born to toil, and the times of his life that oscillate between rest of the night and work of the day, and the rooster that awakens the dawn, who has natural understanding to withstand the test to distinguish between day and between night, in truth is one creation, one spirit progresses and unifies the soul of man and the soul of all beasts entirely, in revealed aspects and in hidden aspects, and in the time that a person elevates, pities his days, and fulfills his supreme task, behold all the times and all the creations elevate through him. And this general vision reveals to us, through the relationship of the creation, the rooster, which calls with voice to awaken the sleeping. With the fulfillment of its task, before the creation of all the tools which awaken for their types, it is a sign about the fulfillment of the task of life in their spirituality which is filled from a multitude of creations, which all stand together to bring to actuality the splendor of man's supreme soul, which progresses and strengthens with the days of life and changing of the times, the days and the nights, with the apportionment of their tasks. And we bless upon this with a heart full of holy feelings, to the God who gives the rooster understanding to distinguish between day and between night.




The entire order of these blessings proceeds and details the thanks for the return of the soul to our innards through awakening, with the mercy of living and existing God, the master of all souls, which are expressed already in its generality in the blessing of Elohai Neshama. And we begin, after the thanks that are specified in a negative formulation, about that which our souls did not descend from its foundation in the heights of its stature, upon which it stands, and we come to thanks which is detailed positively, to give thanks for the specific enlightenment of the light of the soul which returns to us. And we preface our relationship to the entire world, in relation to the general sense the sense of sight, which gives us that pleasant and spectacular feeling, which fills our soul with might and joy of Hashem, from the sight of the universe and all of existence, which was hidden from us completely through quarreling hand of sleep, which made us like the blind, and we admit to God his mercy in the blessing of "Giving Sight to the Blind."






<b>Blessed are You, Lord our God, King of the Universe, Who girds Israel with might:</b> The might of Israel [the Jewish people] is a unique might. It is a might which is not characterized by conquests in which they conquer others, subdue them, or destroy them. Rather, it is a might, the essence of which is tied to the conquest of someone who conquers himself; the might of the divine soul, of the eminent spirit of man which conquers the animalistic body and its crass and stormy desires. It is the might of he who is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he who rules his spirit than one who captures a city [alluding to Proverbs 16:32]. This is the might with which Israel is girded, one that is fitting for the foundation of pure ethics and the lifting of man’s worth above that of an animal; which is primarily appropriate to be said when he puts on his belt, in girding his loins, to more generally be fully equipped and to separate between the lowly part of the body and the higher part of the body. This is so that the forces drawing man to his animal side be influenced to be pure and subservient to the heart's might, which is filled with the courage of purity and a feeling full of holiness, with a supernal ambition towards the might of loftiness. About this goodly portion which is unique to the totality of the nation, with the root foundation being the holiness of its soul, which enlightens each one of its individuals with the beauty of its glory, we hereby recite the blessing to the One who girds Israel with might!

Akedah










"And God tested Avraham..." There is a limit to freedom of will, that attribute which is most pronounced through the act of choice, where ever it is found. Even those manifestations of life which we consider to be free expressions of human choice have in the depths of their existence certain elements of necessity which are hidden from the eye. The Knower of secrets, blessed be He, before whom all hidden things are revealed, wanted to bring into the light of existence all the light of holiness, all the eternal and lofty which was buried -  hidden away in the great soul of Avraham. Toward this end he was graced with absolute freedom of will, free of any inner or outer constraints, in order that his unconditional inner selfhood manifest in all the greatness of its glorious might. This is the secret of the testing in its highest sense - 'and God tested Avraham.'








S.v. And he saw the place afar off: These things are sealed and closed – the amazing events of the soul that happened to the forefather during the course of the three days of walking. It is impossible to elucidate these hidden things of the holy of holies. However that which appeared on the third day, when the holy light reached the height of its power – in place of that which should have been words of speech to designate the mountain – the appearance came as a vision of prophecy. As [his] soul had already climbed to the higher place where all stimuli unite – and as in all spiritual appearances, speech and sight also unite and join into a single perception. The speech, which was in the form of seeing, and the prophetic vision penetrated the soul of the giant forefather so much that his eyes – even being eyes of flesh – became the carriers of prophetic majesty. And before he yet came close to the place that was full of holy majesty, the fascination that connected the higher soul to the holy splendor of the place, already drew it close. [The place hence] already ascended in its significance in such a way that it was no longer possible to designate it with its natural superficial designation as "one of the hills"; but rather the special place to where all of the holiness in life, in the world and in experience are attached. "And he saw the place afar off" – he already saw the majesty of the higher glory that was hidden in the clouds of fog from descending into the hearts of people to give them eternal life. "What did he see? He saw a cloud attached upon the mountain."




















<b>And he said, “Do not move your hand towards the lad, and do not do anything to him”</b> ‘The voice of the Lord is with strength’: Through His angel who fulfills His word, He said that the absolute command - whether from the angle of justice to prevent the evil of spilling blood; or whether from the angle of nature to remove oneself from anything that offends the feelings of a father filled with love towards his beloved son - stands intact. The holy powerful awareness of [man’s] spiritual nature and physical nature have not moved even a hair’s breadth from their heights, by way of the supernal vision that was revealed by the word of the Lord - the thought of sacrifice and giving over oneself in the deepest way to the living God, which is the holiness and the strengthening of truth [that comes] from the power of the will and from the purity of the desire of the spirit. Hence, “Do not move your hand towards the lad” - with all of the stringency of the simple and straightforward prohibition about the thing. And do not think that there is some practical contradiction between the pure love of a father towards your precious son and between the eminent love of God that is moving and flowing in its force in the depths of your profound soul, to the point that there should at least be some proper step to actualize something that would indicate the lessening of this love [towards your son]. That is not so, “and do not do anything to him.” For the mercy and love of the father in a pure soul is precisely the flame of a holy fire which proceeds directly from the pure love of God and His mercy upon all of His creatures, the appearance of which in the world magnifies the majesty and beauty of the systematic supernal holiness that raises life and all of existence to their great heights. 













After all of the sublime elevation that occurred to his soul, it did not have the impact of separating him at all from that great trait of influencing the world - his surroundings with all of their physicality. [Hence] he returned to his lads according to their station - he returned to those same lads that he left "with the donkey," to be available for them, to raise them up and improve them.

Morning Supplications



Korbanot






<b>And Aharon and his sons would wash their hands and feet from it:</b> This holy washing, which is imprinted upon the seal of permanent purity and is fitting to be a preparation for wholesome service, must be deeply rooted in the foundation of the priesthood and its lineage. It encompasses the whole root of the family upon whom the holy service will be for all generations. And all the purifications in all the generations that would come to the priests prepared to serve in holiness, are impacted upon by that foundational purification which has encompassed the entire priesthood from when the word of God first established it to be an everlasting priesthood. “And Aharon and his sons would wash their hands and feet from it.” From this basin which was sanctified with the sanctity of the Tent of Meeting, from the angle of purification of the spirit, the abode of the intellect; and with the sanctity of the altar, from the angle of purification of the soul, the abode of the will. The appropriate washing comes [from the basin] to the hands that perform actions according to the direction of the intellect; and to the feet, the vehicles for movement coming from the impetus of the will.  


<b>It is to be for them a statute for the ages, for him and for his offspring, throughout their generations:</b> The impact of the purity, when the priesthood was established with Aharon and his sons, has some permanence and universality within itself. There is a statute for the ages within its transient activation, in the power of the enterprise itself that they are doing, on account of the concealed power stored within them of the entire foundation of the holiness of the priesthood, for all generations. And the things are so rooted in the first foundation to the point that the essence of this spiritual action of sanctification of purity was first activated upon Aharon, to him as the first essence, such that all of the holiness of the priesthood spreads as an emanation from him – “who has commanded us with the holiness of Aharon,” and it spreads out from him to his seed. And it is not only through the characteristic of closeness of that part of his offspring that were enacting the actions of purity with him, such that they would be like intermediaries and the coming generations would receive it through them. For then every generation would be considered lower because of its distance from the first source of the priesthood’s holiness. Rather God, may He be blessed, placed the unique quality of purity into the holiness of Aharon, such that it be from his power, from the root of his individual holiness, that it bring the holy flow in a direct way to all of his offspring throughout their generations. So it comes out that the enterprise itself, in the first sanctification of the foundation of the priesthood, has the bounty of “a law for the ages” in it, and the continuation of the enterprise moves on to the generations from the essential source, from the father of the priesthood, the one holy to the Lord. “For him and for his offspring, throughout their generations.”















And forgive us for all our sins: Every sin creates some obligation. [It] Damages man himself and damages existence with him, behold he must suffer until he fixes what he damaged. However every damage which comes because of a sin, even an unintentional sin, which is the simple meaning of the sin (The Hebrew word ח.ט.א is usually translated as "sin" in popular parlance. However, R. Kook is hinting to the fact that ח.ט.א literally means to "miss," usually in reference to some target, and missing a target denotes an unintentional mistake.), behold it comes from a minority of the soul's light, which did not illuminate well in the internality of life. However when uppermost mercies overcome, upon the suffering of the Godly light that is cast within restraints, that through this the soul renews its light, and its spiritual power reveals in the avenues of life with each physical impression, then the damage which came from the lack of light is fixed, and the obligation is erased. And this is content of forgiveness, which comes here with connection to sin. "That you shall forgive us for all our sins."

And forgive for all our sins: The matter of forgiveness (סליחה) is not connected to any external matter except for the topic which requires fixing, and also not for an inner matter of this topic itself, as in the example of pardon (מחילה) and of atonement (כפרה), rather it (סליחה) is an image attributed to the forgiver himself, from the side of his lofty value alone, "It is his glory when he overlooks an offense" (Psalms 19:11). Therefore this content is connected to towards the offense, which is a matter that does not add at all upon the revelation of the undertaking more than the iniquity, only in the inner circle of the soul is this image more upsetting, which brings forth an outburst like this, which prepares the damager for transgression, even in a place where the agitation of the physical tendencies are not causal, "Rebellions are rebellious transgressions" (Yoma 36b:6). This content of this fix comes from the source of mercy, which enlightens upon the darkness of the soul, to remove the foundation of this deep wickedness from its source, through the revelation of the power of purity, the loftiness and greatness, of the uppermost Godly light. Therefore the language of term used to indicate a direct object (את) and also not the language of "on" (על) is used here, but rather a practical relationship denoted by the letter Lamed (ל in ותסלח לכל פשעינו). "And forgive for all our sins." 

Eizehu Mekoman



Baraita of Rabbi Yishmael



Pesukei dezimra



Blessings of the Shema



Laws of the Amidah



Amidah



Birkat Kohanim



Prayers for Fast Days and Rain



Vehu Rachum



Tachanun



Reading of the Torah



HaGomel



Returning the Torah to the Ark



Kedusha d'Sidra



Aleinu



Song of the Day



Pitum HaKetoret



L'David



Six Remembrances



Chapter of Repentance



Thirteen Principles of Faith



Hatavat Chalom



Prayer Upon Entering the Study Hall



Laws of Blessings



Terumot and Maaserot



Hamotzi



Laws of the Meal



Birkat Hamazon



Blessing on Fragrance



Blessing on Miracles



Shehecheyanu



Blessing on Sight



Blessing for Healing



Marriage



Circumcision



Pidyon HaBen



Baruch Dayan HaEmet



Minchah



Maariv



Sefirat HaOmer



Bedtime Shema



Erev Rosh Chodesh



Rosh Chodesh



Kiddush Levana



Blessings for Chanukah



Megillah Blessings



Song of Songs




"Every part of you is fair, my darling, there is no blemish in you." That great love with which we love our nation does not blind our eyes from scrutinizing all her blemishes. However, even after an unbiased examination, we find her essence to be entirely clean of any blemish. “Every part of you is fair, my darling, there is no blemish in you.” 

Shabbat Candles



Kabbalat Shabbat






<b>Come, bride:</b> The Shabbat is called a bride, and it is called a queen (Shabbat 119a; Zohar, Devarim 272b). A bride, from the angle of its reception in its place, in its reception from the elevated ones, from its relation to splendor. A queen from the angle of the people, meaning the grasp of the created beings. On Shabbat, when the light of the extra soul adds knowledge, we perceive that which was hidden from us before and that which was disconnected from us. And if so - it was called a bride; but swiftly and immediately, when this light is grasped by us, it is a queen. And even in its essence, light is certainly added by this. "Come bride, the Shabbat queen." And that which we say is the comprehension of its power is nothing but the beginning of the revelation of the comprehension. For the bride does not grasp the depth of the the traits and the conduct of the groom. And she will only grasp [them] in the future in the days ahead, on 'the day that is completely Shabbat.' As then, 'you will call Him, my Man.' However the joy will always be like the glee of the groom for the bride, from the angle of the renewal of light - and may we all quickly merit to completely attain its light! Hence, every Shabbat, we say (Siddur, Shabbat morning), "they will rejoice in Your kingdom," and it is only called a bride at the arrival of the Shabbat. And that is the proper time for this appellation [of Shabbat], at the time of its arrival. So we explain that we will go to greet the bride, and He explains that it is the face of Shabbat. For when it comes to us, it comes with the aspect of Shabbat rest, and that will be the light of the face. And that which during the week is facing backwards (<i>achorayim</i>) will light up our faces on Shabbat.

Bameh Madlikin



Shalom Aleichem



Kiddush



Songs for Shabbat

For it is the first day of the holy festivals. The sanctity of shabbos and the sanctity of the festivals, can be compared to the sanctity of the Written Torah and the sanctity of the Oral Torah. For shabbos, in its establishment, was sanctified by the Heavens, as it says in Beitza 17A, and the festivals, Israel sanctifies the times, as it says in Brachot 49A. 

Shacharit for Shabbat



Birkat HaChodesh



Musaf for Shabbat



Daytime Kiddush



Mincha for Shabbat



Barechi Nafshi



Pirkei Avot



Songs for Motzei Shabbat



The Hallel



Pesach

Our freedom and burning chametz. These are the two primary symbols for the holiday of redemption - the holiday of Passover, our time of freedom. What is the lasting lesson for all generations that we can learn from these two, interdependent themes? The everlasting answer is that there are two components of redemption: 1) Freedom of the self - the body's freedom from all foreign enslavement, from any enslavement that forces the Divine Image within a person to be subjugated to any power that diminishes their value, the glory of their greatness, and the beauty of their sanctity. 2) However, this form of freedom can only be acquired through the freedom of one's soul, the freedom of one's spirit from anything that causes it to divert from the upright and powerful path that is embedded in its essential nature. However, these two types of freedom can only come about, and an individual, or the nation as a whole - with its own unique spiritual disposition - can only merit them, by burning from all of its boundaries, all that prevents against its freedom. This is its chametz - "the leavening agent in the dough" - whose damage is most apparent at a time when the light of redemption is sparking upon it. We must engage in a process of learning how to cultivate within ourselves, the great spirit of freedom that shone upon us during our periods of illumination, and that emerged like a flash of lighting when it appeared in the initial redemption, the redemption from Egypt. When the the King of All Kings, the Holy Blessed One was revealed to us in immense glory and brought us close to Divine worship - which itself is our ultimate freedom - and lifted us up from the denigration of foreign servitude, which is a servitude of falsehood. The difference between a slave and a free person is not merely one of status - that one happens to be enslaved to another, and one is not enslaved. It’s possible to find an enlightened slave whose spirit is filled with freedom; and on the contrary, a free person whose spirit is that of a slave. The fundamental character of freedom is the elevated spirit that raises up an individual and the entire nation to be loyal to their inner essence, to the soul’s quality of the Divine image within. And it is through this quality that one is able to feel that their life is purposeful, and is worth its value. This is not the case when one possesses the spirit of servitude. The content of their life and feelings will never shine in their essential, soulful quality, but rather according to what is deemed good and proper by another who rules over them through any form of control - be it formally, or morally - according to what the other deems proper and good. And we, by the light of the inner light of this essential freedom - ״etched upon the tablets, do not read this 'etched' [charut/חָר֖וּת] but rather freedom [cheirut /חֵרוּת] ״ (Avot 6:2) - we shall journey forward, to pronounce more and more our inner replenishing independence. That which we acquired through the revelation of the Shechinah (Divine Presence), which we acquired through the single most wondrous event in the universe that was performed for us at the moment that the Blessed God redeemed us, and redeemed our ancestors from Egypt into eternal liberation. Come along, brothers, all of us to the Seder; let it be known to us that we are the children of royalty and a nation for whom freedom is its eternal fate. Israel is no slave, nor one born into servitude, and shall not be laid to scorn. From the moment that they were elevated above, from the day of our festival of freedom - the flag of freedom and the burning of chametz; that will flow like water through our insides and like oil in our bones by means of the powerful force of the Holy and reliable generator; through upholding the word of God, Redeemer of Israel for all eternity, who has commanded us to safeguard the matzahs. Hold fast to freedom and to the burning of chametz, and be quickly redeemed in complete redemption.

Haggadah



Shavuot



Rosh HaShanah Prayer



Shofar



Musaf for Rosh HaShanah



Ten Days of Repentance



Yom Kippur



"My God, before I was created I was not worthy, and now that I have been created it is as if I had not been created": Before I was created, that entire boundless time from naught until I was created, of course there was nothing in the world that needed me. Because if I was a deficiency vis-à-vis some purpose and fulfillment I would have been created, and since I was not created until that time it is a sign, that I was not worthy until then to have been created, and I was not needed but rather for the "moment like this" (Esther 4:14) for which I was created, because the moment has arrived for me to fulfill something to complete reality. And had I dedicated my actions towards the purpose of my creation [then] "here I am" (Genesis 22:1, Genesis 22:7, Exodus 3:4) now worthy. However since my deeds are not directed towards The Good Purpose behold I have not reached the purpose of my creation and I am still not worthy like beforehand.

Between Yom Kippur and Sukkot



Sukkot and Shemini Atzeret

