Abarbanel on I Samuel
אברבנאל על שמואל א
The Biblical Exegesis of Don Isaac Abrabanel. PhD thesis by Dr. David E. Cohen, University of London, 2015
https://www.sefaria.org/

Abarbanel on I Samuel

Introduction







Chapter 1



Verse 1







<b>And there was a certain man.</b> I have already explained, in connection with the verse ‘And it was after the death of Moses (the opening verse of the Book of Joshua) that it is not (mere) linguistic usage to commence a narrative with a (conjunctive) ‘vav’, as R. David Kimhi thought; but it comes to connect…the forthcoming… with the preceding narrative; and since, at the end of the Book of Judges, there is related the episode of the concubine at Gibeah, and that (it was) from that man dwelling in… the hill-country of Ephraim, and… his concubine, that great evil ensued for all Israel, (Scripture) here relates (immediately) afterwards an episode in (exact) contrast to it – that there was a certain man – also a Levite from the hill-country of Ephraim - named Elkanah, from whom and his wife Hannah great good ensued, through the birth of her son Samuel. (This deliberate juxtaposition is) so that we should not revile the Levites, or execrate the hill-country of Ephraim, from where evil emanated for Israel, since (it was) from there that the Lord also ordained blessing…

…It is also possible to interpret ‘Zophim’ as a family name, insofar as they were of the children of Zuph, who is called ‘Zophai’ in the Book of Chronicles; and you will likewise find later, in the stories of Saul and David, (the phrase) ‘they came into the land of Zuph’; and thus (the author) here traces Elkanah’s lineage to the (original) head of the family, viz. ‘the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph’… after whose name the (surrounding) country was called…
Scripture wishes to teach us… that all his (Samuel’s) ancestors were God-fearing men of truth; for (the name) Elkanah alludes to (the fact) that God acquired him as His inheritance (she-kanah ha-Elohim le’nahalah lo); and similarly (the name) Jeroham (he shall be treated mercifully) indicates that his father was merciful (rahman) and beneficent to others; and likewise (the name) Elihu indicates that his grandfather cleaved to the Divine Presence (Eli-hu = He is my God)…

Verse 2



Verse 3

(Scripture) relates that Elkanah’s regular custom was to ascend… once a year to prostrate himself and to sacrifice, etc., which is the meaning of ‘mi-yamim yamimah’, as in Exodus 13:10... on the Feast of the Ingathering, which is the season of joy; or (alternatively) this phrase means ‘from season to season, and from one pilgrim-festival to the next, namely that he went to Shiloh three times each year. But the former interpretation is more correct, for (Scripture) states (subsequently) ‘And so he would do year by year, on the occasion of her (Hannah) ascending to the House of the Lord’, etc…
And (the purpose of Scripture in relating that) the two sons of Eli… were ministering there unto the Lord is to state that, even though Hophni and Phinehas…were (officiating) in the Sanctuary and… taking the sacrificial offerings (from the people) by force, and lying with the women (pilgrims), as will be mentioned later, notwithstanding all this, Elkanah did not refrain from going there year after year to prostrate himself and to sacrifice; for, because of his great righteousness, he was concerned with the worship of God, and…not with the wickedness of the priests.

Verse 4

The commentators have interpreted (this expression) as ‘one worthy portion to relieve her anger and wrath’; and according to (Targum) Jonathan the meaning would be ‘a portion fit to be received in a pleasant spirit…’ Both these (interpretations) emanate from our Sages, taken from Midrash Samuel ad loc… R. Levi b. Gershon (Ralbag) interpreted ‘apayim’ to mean ‘face’; i.e. that she was sitting near him face to face (to enable him) to look closely at her (in a caring fashion)… The Christians have rendered ‘apayim’ as ‘sad’ (‘tristis’ in Latin), and explained that Elkanah would give Hannah just one portion, but that he was angry that he could not give more than one portion, namely because the Lord had shut her womb and that she (thus) had no children to whom he could give numerous portions, as with Peninah’s children… This is (the purport of) ‘For he loved Hannah’, viz. because he loved her and desired to have children from her – and as he had no children from her to whom he could give many (additional) portions, he became sad that her portion was necessarily (a single) one only…R. David Kimhi advanced this (interpretation) too, in his father’s name, and it is… very attractive...

Verse 5



Verse 6

For when a person who is (already in a state of) sadness and worry about a great trouble, when another (cause of) anguish befalls him, be it …small or great, will recall to mind his major troubles, and that minor trouble will (thus) have a huge effect upon him – not on its own account but because it reminds him of his other, overwhelming trouble… that is why (Scripture) states that ‘her rival (Peninah) would anger Hannah with an additional cause, in order to make her fret’… not on account of that (extraneous) small issue, but because of the innate anguish within her that the Lord had shut her womb… And our Sages, in Bava Batra have stated: ‘R. Levi said: “… Peninah’s intention was for the sake of Heaven”, and (on this) R. Abraham b. David explained that the anger (Peninah caused Hannah)…was so that she (Hannah) should pray and complain to the Holy One, blessed be He, and plead for mercy; for since her husband loved her (in any case), she was neglecting to plead for mercy… 

Verse 7

And according to the view of our Sages…who said that Peninah (‘s provocation) was for a good purpose, we may say that the reason she provoked Hannah only when she went up to the House of the Lord was so that she (Hannah) would (be induced to) pray to the Lord there and weep bitterly… And it is further possible to say… that Peninah and Hannah were not (living) in one city, since Hannah was in Ramathah and Peninah in Ramah; and because they only came together when they went up to the House of the Lord…(Scripture) states that Peninah would provoke Hannah to anger when they went up to the House of the Lord; for at other times they never met! We may say further that the anger (of Hannah) was over the gifts (distributed by Elkanah); for since Elkanah only gave them when they went up to the House of the Lord, it was at that time that the provocation and anger occurred…

Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12

…I think that, because Elkanah and his wives used to come there each year,Eli had become fond of them, and since on this occasion he saw Hannah in this state, he became enraged… that she was drunk, and said to her ‘How long will you be drunk? Remove your wine from yourself!’ - …he was not referring to the wine she had already drunk, but… to the future; it was now appropriate that she should no longer continue drinking wine (altogether), so that she should not become drunk…that is (the meaning of) what he (Eli) said: ‘How long will you get drunk?’ i.e. on a daily basis, which would involve great… embarrassment…therefore it would be best that she distance herself from drunkenness by refraining from… wine altogether… For… it would be appropriate for a man to set right the despicable character traits he happens to have by (recourse to) the method employed by those (engaged in) straightening (crooked) rods – that they bend them right over to the opposite extremity, so that, when they return to their natural state, they will remain in a median position…In accordance with this (notion), Eli ordered Hannah that… to avoid drunkenness, she should avoid drinking wine altogether, which is the opposite extreme… and in the (Talmudic) Tractate Ketubot it is taught: “One cup (of wine) is excellent for a woman, two (cups) are shameful…”

Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15



Verse 16



Verse 17



Verse 18



Verse 19



Verse 20

…It would have been fitting, on this account, for him to have been called Saul (Heb. Sha’ul), and the commentators have not given a correct reason for this (incongruity) …I think, in this connection, that one of three alternatives (must be  adopted).either she intended (to convey) by this name that God (‘El’) put him (Heb. samo) in the world – hence she called him ‘Sh’muel’ as though to say that God placed him (there); and she said ‘For I have requested him from the Lord’,… and He placed him inside me; or she intended (to convey) by this name that Sh’muel was from God Almighty, blessed be He… ‘Sh’muel’ being equivalent to ‘she-me’El’ (the one who was from God)…or it is also possible to say that ‘Sh’muel’ is equivalent to ‘she’mo El’ (his name is God) – since all divine things are called by the name of the Holy One… as (we find that Jacob) called the altar he made ‘El-Elohe-Yisrael’ (God, the God of Israel); and the prophet (Isaiah) said (in reference to King Ahaz’s son) “And his name shall be called Pele-joez-El-Gibbor” (Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty God), etc…

Verse 21



Verse 22



Verse 23



Verse 24

… I accordingly think… that since Elkanah and Hannah his wife brought the child to Eli together… Hannah was concerned that Eli would have the same (halakhic) problem as I have raised…; namely, why did Elkanah not make the vow that Samuel should become a Nazirite, rather than Hannah, since in law, (only) a man may vow his son to Naziriteship, but a woman may not?… Accordingly, Hannah said “My lord, do not think that because we are bringing the child together, we, Elkanah my husband and I, were… equal partners in (relation to) him. That is not so; for it was for my sake… alone that the child was born!” That is the meaning of the expression ‘bi adoni’, meaning ‘it was for my sake…’ And she (proceeded to) explain why it was for her sake and not her husband’s, saying “ I was the woman who was standing with you in this place to pray to the Lord”; and as it was I who was standing here, and not Elkanah…the child (’s existence) was… on my account; and just as I stood here, and not Elkanah, so (too) it was I who prayed for this child’ (meaning, he, Elkanah, did not pray for him either in this place…or anywhere else) and thus it was through me… that the child came into existence - through my prayer”. She further said “And the Lord granted me my request”, etc. (meaning , God…gave him to me and…not to Elkanah my husband”) – and from this it necessarily follows that “It is also I who has lent him to the Lord”(meaning) “just as (it was) I (who) stood on my watch concerning him, and I (who) prayed for him, and God gave him to me alone, so too it is within my power to make a vow concerning him and to give him to the Lord”. …This is the meaning of “And (it is) also I who has lent him to the Lord”…