Tractate Soferim
מסכת סופרים
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Tractate Soferim



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4

These are the [Divine] Names that are not erased when written - Alef-Lamed (El), Alef-Dalet (Adonai), Yod-Hei (Yah), Shaddai, Tz'vaot, Ehyeh-Asher-Ehyeh. Rabbi Yossi says, "Tz'vaot" is not sacred. Said Rabbi Shimon ben Elazar about the guild houses,, They would write in Jerusalem and they would erase 'Tz'vaot,' for they had a tradition that it was laic, as it is written (Deuteronomy 20:9) "And the commanders of the armies [tz'vaot] will command at the head of the nation."
One who writes the Alef-Lamed for the four letters (Alef-Lamed-Hei-Yod), or Yod-Hei for the four letters (Yod-Hei-Waw-Hei), doesn't erase it, since there are already Names within them. One who writes the Shin-Dalet of "Shaddai" or the Tzadi-Bet-Alef of "Tz'vaot" or the Alef-Hei of "Ehyeh-Asher-Ehyeh," they can erase it, since there aren't already Names within them.
All the letters used next to a Name, whether preceding or following, these may be erased. The prefixes - Bet, Kaf, Lamed, and Vav - these can be erased. And suffixes - 'Eloheinu,' 'Eloheikhem,' 'Eloheihem' - 'nu,' 'khem,' 'hem,' these may be erased as well. But some say that the 'khem' from 'Eloheikhem' may not be erased.
And all the secular names whose letters include the letters of the Name, these can be erased. [Some examples of names of ambiguous status follow.] "For God knows that on the day you eat from it your eyes will be opened and you will be like gods" (Genesis 3:5) - the first 'God' is holy, the second isn't. "For Y-H-W-H your God is the God of the gods" (Deuteronomy 10:17) the first 'the God' is holy, the second isn't.
"And Lord of lords" (ibid.) - the first 'Lord' is holy, the second isn't. "God of Abraham" (Genesis 31:53) is holy, "God of Naḥor" (ibid.) isn't. "God do not curse" (Exodus 22:27) could be holy or not - Rabbi Shimon says, holy. "For seeing your face is like seeing the face of God" (Genesis 33:10) - this is definitely not holy. "Camp of God" (Genesis 32:2) - this is definitely holy.
All the names that are said regarding Abraham are holy except for one that is not - as it is written (Genesis 18:3) "And he said, my lords, if I have found favor in your eyes," but some say that one is holy too. (Genesis 20:13) "And it was, when they made me wander - God אלהים" Rabbi Ḥanina the brother of Rabbi Yehoshua says, "Holy, because if it weren't for God I have been made to wander anyway."
All the names said regarding Lot are profane except for the last one (Genesis 19:19) "And Lot said to them, 'Please, do not, my Lord.'" All the names said regarding Micah the idolater are profane. Rabbi Yossi says, those with Yod-Hei are holy, those with Alef-Lamed are profane, except for "the House of God in Shiloh" (Judges 18:31). And all the names said regarding Naboth are holy except for "Naboth has reviled god and king" (I Kings 21:13). And all the names said regarding Gibeah of Benjamin, Rabbi Eliezer says profane, Rabbi Yehoshua says holy. Rabbi Eliezer said to him, "And how is that possible? Does the Omnipresent make a promise and not fulfill?" Rabbi Yehoshua said, "The Omnipresent already fulfilled his promise."
"Let me tell of the decree" (Psalm 2:7) is holy - but the sages say it's not. "before God אל אלהים in Zion" (Psalm 84:8) the first is not holy, but the second is. "To come before God אל אל in judgement" (Job 34:23) - the first is not holy, bur the second is. "Immanuel עמנו אל" the name (Isaiah 7:14) and "God is with us עמנו אל" the phrase (Isaiah 8:10) - the first is not holy, the second is is holy. The first can be erased, the second cannot be erased.
"So when the gods אלהים made me wander" (Genesis 20:13), "And who is a God like You" (Micah 7:18) - the former is not holy, the latter is holy. "Samaria must bear her guilt for she has defied her God" (Hosea 14:1) this is holy. Rabbi Natan says, "in the house of his God" (Hosea 9:8) is also holy. "And you, to your God you must return" (Hosea 12:7) - this is holy. "God אלהים stands in the divine assembly in the midst of the gods אלהים judging" (Psalm 82:1) - it's used as both holy and not holy. "God hands me over יסגירני אל אל to a perverse one" (Job 16:11) - the first is holy, the second אל is not. "For before God כי אל אל has he said 'I will bear'" (Job 34:31) the first is not holy, the second is holy. And Rabbi Eliezer son of Rabbi Yossi the Galilean said, "And let there be no ואל יהי resting place" (Job 16:18), "And I have it in my power יש לאל ידי" (Genesis 31:29), "But you shall be powerless ואין לאל ידך" (Deuteronomy 28:32), "when you have the power בהיות לאל ידך" (Proverbs 3:27), "to death אל מות" (Proverbs 2:18) - none of these are holy. "And God said that I hurry" (II Chronicles 35:21), is holy. "And refrain from going against God who is with me" (ibid.) is holy. According to the words of Rabbi Yossi bar Yehudah, "God, arrogant ones have come up against me" (Psalm 86:14) is holy, but the reader has to make sure there is a pause between "God" and "arrogant" so as not to imply "arrogant gods." But Merciful and Compassionate, Long-Suffering, Abounding in Lovingkindness, King of Kings, On High, The Great One, The Almighty, Righteous and Upright, Steadfast, Pure, Mighty - these all can be erased. But one who curses himself or another using them is liable. A non-Jew or a dead person is liable for one offering, whereas a judge or a leader is liable for two. And some say that the leader is liable for three. One who curses his father or mother with the Ineffable Name - his punishment is stoning. But one who does so with the other epithets - he is liable for an admonition.

Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14













(And afterwards one lifts the Torah and says softly "One is our God, Great is our Master, His Name is Holy and Awesome Forever," and the people respond and say "YHWH is God, YHWH is His Name." Then you go back and say both parts again). 
Immediately one unwraps the Torah for 3 columns worth and lifts it and displays the writing within for the people who are standing to his right and to his left, and then he turns it in front of him and behind him since the commandment is that all men and women see the written text and bow before it and say "And this is the Torah that God placed with Moses before the people of Israel" (Deuteronomy 4:14) (or) "God's Torah is perfect, renewing life" (Psalms 19:8). And the one reading the Maftir (additional section from the Prophets) gives the Torah back to the Cantor of the assembled and he returns the Torah in order to cover it with the heads/crowns of the guests/readers, since it is not respectful for the Torah to be by itself... 