Hegyonei Uziel
הגיוני עוזיאל
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Hegyonei_Uziel
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org
- Essential Texts of Zionism
-Translated from the Hebrew by Nina Salaman, 1924 This edition published in 1924 by Jewish Publication Society of America,

Hegyonei Uziel

Introduction



Gate I



Gate II



Gate III



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Chapter 23



Chapter 24



Chapter 25



Chapter 26



Chapter 27



Chapter 28



Chapter 29



Chapter 30



Chapter 31



Chapter 32



Chapter 33



Chapter 34



Chapter 35



Chapter 36



Chapter 37



Chapter 38



Chapter 39








You should know that behold the Rambam established the revival of the dead as the thirteenth principle of the thirteen principles of faith and wrote: And the revival of the dead is from the main fundamental principles of Moshe, our teacher - peace be upon him. And there is no religion and no attachment to the Jewish religion for the one who does not believe [in] this. But it is [only] for the righteous (...) And how should the evildoers be revived - as they are dead even in their lifetime? (...) And you should know that man, per force, must die and decompose and return to what he is composed of. (Rambam, Introduction to Chapter Chelek, Commentary on the Mishnah) And so this sage who was reputed for his knowledge of the truth focused on the ultimate end, so he left over everything beside it and [just] said, "All of Israel has a share in the world to come." 
From this we learned that the Rambam, may his memory be blessed, intended, [here] in these laws, to define the concept of the world to come found in the words of our Rabbis, may their memory be blessed, as referring to the world of souls, which is after death. And it is the ultimate good, which has nothing similar to it. The mouth cannot speak, nor the mind think, to describe its pleasure and its light. However there are other rewards, and they are the days of the Messiah and the revival of the dead. 

Gate IV



Gate V



Gate VI



Gate VII



Gate VIII



Gate IX



Gate X



Gate XI



Gate XII



Gate XIII



Gate XIV



Gate XV



Gate XVI



Gate XVII



Gate XVIII



Gate XIX



Gate XX



Gate XXI



Gate XXII



Gate XXIII



Gate XXIV



Gate XXV



Gate XXVI



Gate XXVII



Gate XXVIII



Chapter 1












The purpose of Judaism is a call to peace to every person in the world, all the nations, all the countries, every place in the world. The Jewish redemption is not a selfish redemption, we come in the name of Judaism to free all human beings from their wars, from their devastation, from their superstitions and their primitively oppressive faiths, to save people from tyrannical kingdoms and religious clergy who are hypocrites and cause them to suffer. We don't want to change the order of the whole world but we do want to change something about the world, we wish to free all people on this earth from oppression. Our Rabbis tell us, in the future when Moshiach comes, there is no difference between then and now except oppressive governments that oppress the people. That which will be abolished in the days of Moshiach - it is not only about the Jewish people, but about humanity as a whole. Oppressive governments with their armies and police will not govern, no external power can compel a person to justice and righteousness

Gate XXIX



Gate XXX



Gate XXXI



Gate XXXII



Chapter 1



Chapter 2





































































































































































































































































My heart is in the east,
and I in the uttermost west--
How shall I render my vows
and my bonds, while yet
Zion lieth beneath the fetter of Edom
and I in Arab chains?...
A light thing would it seem to me to leave
all the good things of Spain --
Seeing how precious in mine eyes to behold the dust of the desolate sanctuary