Ohr Ne'erav
אור נערב
YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
http://www.torontotorah.com

Ohr Ne'erav

Introduction



PART I

Subject







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6

Now that we have spoken about those who distance themselves from this wisdom [kabbalah]… we shall now come to describe those who draw near to it… For in those who draw near we have seen three groups: one mistaken, one sinning, and one desirable:
The mistaken group includes some of our generation, who have had no introduction to Tanach, Mishnah or Talmud, and they engage in this wisdom. Without any doubt they are completely wrong, for several reasons:
First, they have never seen the light of dialectical study… and so they take the allegory found in this wisdom, to the point that they nearly imagine corporeality in the heavenly entities… And they think these are not allegories, and do not descend to the depth of the reasoning.
Second… the order of levels in the wisdom of our holy Torah is: mastering Tanach, then mastering Mishnah, then mastering Kabbalah. They have ascended to mastering Kabbalah without the ladder and the path of the levels.

The sinning group includes those who draw near to this wisdom because they see themselves as great sages who lack nothing but this wisdom… Can it be that such a smart person would have a less wise person speak before him regarding this wisdom, and not respond with his own share? This group also includes those of coarse arrogance, who also study for non-altruistic purposes… May G-d save us from them and from their portion.

















And the desirable group includes those who take the straight path, who have a share in Tanach and a share in Talmud and its rulings which we have in Mishnah. They learn this wisdom to enter its secrets to know their Creator, to achieve the wonderful level of true knowledge of the torah, and to pray before their Creator to unite, via their mitzvot, G-d and his Shechina, and that is the most desirable service before the Creator of all.

PART II

Subject







PART III

Subject







PART IV

Subject







PART V

Subject







PART VI

Subject







PART VII

Subject



Letter Alef



Letter Bet



Letter Gimel



Letter Daled



Letter Heh



Letter Vav



Letter Zayin



Letter Chet



Letter Tet



Letter Yod



Letter Kaf



Letter Lamed



Letter Mem



Letter Nun



Letter Samekh



Letter Ayin



Letter Peh



Letter Tzadi



Letter Kof



Letter Resh



Letter Shin



Letter Tav



Appendix The Introductory Material



