Ma'amar Hador
מאמר הדור
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Ma'amar Hador

The great pain, that pushes down the soul with a great and terrible melancholy, is found in our generation in anyone who thinks about thinking and dabbles a bit in philosophy. And for those who have the ability to accept gentle and straight feelings in their hearts - those [overwhelming] feelings are indescribable. We wither away as we watch an entire generation - fathers and children of an entire nation alike - twisting in horrible pain and hellish anguish. The pain is so great that it takes away the ability to speak. One cannot tell its own issues, in a clear way - that could, on its own, sweeten in a meaningful way the aches of the heart. One can talk, but not tell, of the lesions of their heart; one can only degrade others, rage and curse. The horrible issue, both spiritual and material, oy! They have weakened our world, took away the shining honor of our life. Our eyes are murked and we cannot see our own dignity. We had stooped so low we are in the same degree of those who are disgraced, who are constantly fed on disgracing others, cursing, and by every hotheaded characteristic. If only that was our true value, to be incompetent and lack all respect, then our hearts wouldn’t ache. It hurts only when those of stature walk as slaves on the land, when cherished and respected individuals are disgraced so much that they forget their own dignity and value. "ראה ד' והביטה כי הייתי זוללה" (איכה א' י"א  See, O LORD, and behold, how abject I am become (Lamentation, 1 - 11). And if our generation was truly bad and corrupt. A generation filled with scum, we would gladly accept the contempt and dishonor - we wouldn’t be worthy of a better life. "נשכבה בבשתנו ותכסנו כלימתנו" We would lie down in our shame, and let our confusion cover us (Jeremiah 3, 25)But what will comfort us when we would go into the deep innards of this generation’s emotional, mental, and ethical state? We will not find a low generation, nor will we find them  a generation of sinners to be truthful. Both in the parents and the children we will find a lot of good, gentle emotions, and high desires. And yet we see all that we are missing. Not just the strikes on us that are doubled; we are chased up until our neck; our blood is spilled to the ground. Our soul does not know how to relieve ourselves even in the slightest for all the precious and beloved blood of our children and brothers. The Heart is solidifying itself like stone, the brain turns to a bar of lead and we know nothing but how to be excited, furious, angry and hateful. Oy, what has become of us: "בת עמי לאכזר כיענים במדבר" איכה ד' The daughter of my people is become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness Apart of all that, the general animosity that surrounds us from all directions, the disgrace and inner humiliations that comes out of even those who wish to come to our aid, who say we deserve mercy - they too have diminished our spirit so we cannot look at ourselves anymore without a view of anger, suspicion, and humiliation. As if we, and only we, are the wicked, the sinners, the ignorant, and the unenlightened of all the nations. Oh dear. 
The hands are weak, the knees are failing, the heart is filled with fear, and the eyes keep wandering here and there - maybe there is a shred of light, some spark of consolation. Maybe it would be worthy to enlight, warm, to raise by it the spark of holy fire, but none are to be found. The fathers are scared and desperate. The children are filled with anger and fury. None speaks the language of the other. Each one fortifies himself in the troubles that are unique to them, each blames the other, and hangs the collar around just their own neck. And in order to return the hearts of these to those, nevertheless pull hands together for important and general work - for that there is no desire and no one is asking for it.  "י' ט"ז) נהפכו עלי צירי"  (דניאל  "ואלך מר בחמת רוחי ויד אלהים עלי חזקה". (יחזקאל ג' י"ד)reason of the vision my pains are come upon me (Daniel, 10, 16) and I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit, and the hand of the LORD was strong upon me. (Ezekiel, 3, 14)
Quickly! My Ideas!  Do not dally and do not dwell, for there is a just sun shining, it will heal in its wings, wipe the tears of all faces and the winds of joy, will replace gloom spirits and fill all hearts. Our generation is a wonderful generation, a generation filled with puzzlement. It is hard to find its equivalent in all of our chronicles. It is made of different opposites, light and darkness are active and mixed in it. It is shallow and low, but also high and imposing. It is completely guilty while being completely virtuous. In order to help it we must understand it.
Throughout all of time and in every generation, when the generation has flaws they go through all of their moral nature. A generation that has forgotten his god, will also be unruly and rebellious, glutton and drunkard. Since the beginning of our history, When the people of Israel had forsaken their god and rock. On the one hand, “those who sacrifice people and kiss the lamb” “stick to the false idols” and “forget the God who saved them”. And on the other, “prostitution and wine takes the heart”, “some come as thieves and some wait outside to steal”. Here “Women cry out for Tamuz”, and there “each brother holds you from the back and each friend will gossip”. And this line is also with us as we are in the diaspora. This generation is weird, it is mischievous and wild, but also superior and mighty. Even if we take out of the equation those few crude individuals who use this wind of licentiousness to commit theft and other injustices, we will still find that the audacity thrives and grows. The son is no longer ashamed of his father(’s view of him)  and youngsters will humiliate elders. On the other hand - the feelings of charity, decency, justice rise and grow. The strength of the sciences and the ideologies gushes and rises. Large parts of the younger generation do not hold respect to its traditions, not because their souls have been mucked, they did not fall from those borders where the law and justice are in line with common sense. But it is so because they rose to a [spiritual/ethical) position and due to the character that they use to view the world - law and justice, tradition and faith in general, all that is pure and holy, every divine,eternal, great truth that is to be found in creation. This is due for lack of enough work, as part of their study, learning the fundamental emotional and intellectual aspects of the Torah space, “הועם זהב ושונא הכתם הטוב" (איכה א ד)And this leads them to think that everything is much lower than its actual worth. [the generation] grows and rises at once. Trouble has rinsed it, washed it, gave it a gift of heart and a thinking mind, a generation that invents new ideas, that flies. A generation that cannot stand the lows anymore. Their mind gave them wings and it is soaring to the heights, yet even those heights don't hold what they are after. It has risen above the Jerusalem of the earth that is destroyed, desolated, and humiliated to the bottom of the depths. But it cannot enter the Jerusalem of high above, since “God would not enter the Jerusalem of above until it enters the Jerusalem of the Earth” (מסכת תענית דף ה עמוד א). "Royal shrine, city of king. Rise up and leave your ravaged state.You have dwelt long enough in the valley of tears. Now God will take pity on you. Awake, awake, Your light has come! Arise, shine, Wake up and sing: YHVH’s glory dawns upon you." (לכה דודי, Translation - Open Siddur Project)
Let us show them the path, the entrance to the city, so they can find the opening. Let themknow that what they are seeking to be found on the border of Israel. אֲחַזְתִּיו֙ וְלֹ֣א אַרְפֶּ֔נּוּ עַד־שֶׁ֤הֲבֵיאתִיו֙ אֶל־בֵּ֣ית אִמִּ֔י וְאֶל־חֶ֖דֶר הוֹרָתִֽי "I held him fast, I would not let him go, Till I brought him to my mother’s house,To the chamber of her who conceived me” (Song of Songs, 3, 4) "אנהגך אביאך אל בית אמי תלמדני, אשקך מיין הרקח מעסיס רמוני".“I would lead you, I would bring you. To the house of my mother, Of her who taught me—I would let you drink of the spiced wine,Of my pomegranate juice.”(Song of Songs, 8,2) We will not deprive them of all of the light and good, all that shine and power they gained. We will instead add to them, shine on them a light of life, of truth that shines from the source of the Israeli soul and our children will gaze at it and flock around it.
The dreaded disease of the generation isn’t to be found in the heart of the feelings, nor in lust or promiscuity. It is not in the hands that work with strength or in the legs that hurry to do bad, although all of these are hurt by it. The source of the disease is in the mind - in the power of thought. At the top of the hill of thought, that embraces all, hides a fierce disease. It is deeper than any trained language, and when it comes to it, none of us can understand what the other is saying, every minor symptom adds to the range of human misery and our eyes see it and ache. We do not need much investigation to see that the reason for our generation’s problems is in the mind. While the masses go with  the current, by the furor of turmoil, counting on outside arbiters and by frivolity. But the true inner reason that leads to all of those is the general direction of mind, that has found a place in those powers. They demand to come to terms with the treasure of emotions that they’ve always had. Those that come by being accustomed, by education and tradition, and they did not find it to fully and thoroughly understand them.they are similar in the way they only find the darkness of it, emotions without knowledge, of cowardice without courage and their hearts are burning in them. Since they did not find a paved way to light knowledge upon those ancient feelings - even those that are beneficial to our nation - and to elevate all of the individual points to the heights of a towering mind that holds and investigates  the entire world, that wishes to pave its path the study of life that is even above the metaphysical majesty. It is because they won’t find those that they turn to contempt and negation. It is from a heartache and a bitter soul, from an emptiness and lack of substantial life, that many join those parties while not knowing their place in them, yet they give their strength to strangers. We shall pity those miserable children and siblings of ours, for they are drowning in the rough seas of spiritual hardship, harsher than any ailment and suffering. We shall reach out to them bearing goods of comfort that are full of thought and produce serenity and bravery. Things that come from the same  power that brought on the turmoil and shook them into the destroyed and agitated state. For what is the power that led to all of that changes in their hearts if not literature? And since literature has so much effect on them, it is understandable that the response should be on the mental capacities on which literature affects the most. Even though it has a lot of prattle and enticement, it would never have had such an effect if it wasn't based on a strong mental foundation. How else can it reside in and gain so many hearts to systematically swallow and destroy.
When the generation is low, when its morals are corrupt, when its natural definition of justice and honesty are underdeveloped, the mind does not work on it for better or worse, or at least the effect it has is diminished. But since (when) it is rising, once it feels in it a nobility and gentleness, a strong inclination to educate, benefit, and an internal understanding of many paths of life, even though they are not complete and advanced, it is already thirsty for thoughts and logic. Alongside that comes the desire for a hearty feeling of honesty that is filled with life. While it is true that in the ancient circumstances, on the side of the characteristics of the Torah study, both halachically and that of morals, were dressed back then according to the generations back then. Back then the generation in its entirety was not ready to imagine itself worthy of high expectations. All of its moralistic flaws would manifest as a lower sort of lust. Now we see the rise of the general population over the specific individuals - that is a general trend in human history. In most of the ages of history we find higher elevated wisemen that we are in awe of their greatness. But the general population of those times were of a low condition both in knowledge and morality.  It is true that our nation was the outlier to this rule due to the divine holiness above us, as if it was a miracle. In later generations those of such high standing have been diminished in numbers while the generation itself began rising. In our nation we see the number of uneducated is growing smaller as is the number of geniuses and the righteous. In these hasty times this is even more evident.  The rise of the general population is also the reason for the downfall, this generation finds all that they hear from parents and teachers beneath them. Those morals do not capture the new generation’s heart nor do they quell their thirst. It also no longer casts the shadow of fear since this generation already grew above characterizing it’s life by escaping or fearing something - neither physical or fictional, materialistic or spiritual. The horrible troubles and tribulations it's been through has hardened it, made it fierce. Fears and nightmares no longer shock them. The generation has the ability only to rise up and to walk a path of life that goes onward and upward. Even if they wanted to, they could not be bent and they wouldn't bow down. There is no burden in which they will not find the impression of the light of life, of thought and emotion. They cannot come back (as in repent YT) out of fear, but they are very talented in coming back through a love that connects to the awe of the exalted. Our vibrant generation has yet to produce anything practical but their potential is great. This is a generation that will die for what they believe to be sublime. A great part of who they are comes from their sense of what is right, what is just, and what is true. Those parts cannot be lowly, even if their actual goals are wrong; their spirit is great and transcendent. ...
A generation with such great spiritual wants, has no other option but to want, to hear great things wherever they turn to. The essence of greatness they are looking for is that all things must be particular and articulated within their greatness and reach. The more internal goals, that strings up the ethical, religious, and national life. Everything that depends or touches them must be completely understood by them, to the extant they can imagine with their power of clarification. And when they don’t understand, they will nonetheless try to find some emotion or state of mind in order to find life in their hearts in light of their standing and awe. The smaller and simple things on their own, regardless of how truthful and just they are, will not be enough; they will not find serenity in them. And a generation with such great potential, yet so little concrete power, demands much, and we have nothing prepared to give them. They cannot be saved from their own flaws and be directed to the proper way of life by anything other than talking to them about what they are already familiar with, what they understand. We must do that in order for them to find that great light and joy they are asking for even in the depths they lay in. Yet we can only reach and  provide them with a few dim lightwaves. Such an amount will be barely enough to liven up their hearts so they can begin rising up and ascend “ובמרחקים יזכרוני וחיו את בניהם ושבו" and they shall remember Me in far countries; and they shall live with their children, and shall return (The Book of Zecharia, 10, 9) And once they will simply stand on the path of light, they will go on and the light will find them as the dawn rises. And that is why it is time to start this holy work for us to learn ourselves, so we can teach our younger generation, who wish to at least be alive and awake. Some of them even wish to think and feel what is worthy for an Israeli and human.
The resurrection, the promise made: וְהֵשִׁיב לֵב-אָבוֹת עַל-בָּנִים, וְלֵב בָּנִים עַל-אֲבוֹתָם “And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers” (Malachi 3:23-24) can only happen by the air of the land of Israel. The ethical development of the group is similar to that of the individual. There are two levels - the straight path and the struggle. Just like when the individual has yet to transcend the top of stride for a completely ethical being, while his nature has yet to be molded by the seal of the just and the good, walking the righteous path is difficult for them. They still fight with every step he takes and they have to push their own evil forces; to sometimes conquer and cancel them out. This is not the path of light, yet. Until they will grow using both the light of the Torah with the light of mind and the natural inclination that is awakening in a straight and honest heart. Then they will find that they do not need to be prepared for the inner battles as much. Even when,and if, they will come to a struggle, they will find a totally different kind of courage. They do not need to conquer any of their spiritual powers. There is no need to lock and cage them so they will do nothing. They will be taken with human ties and cords of love and take them to what is good and just, to the highest peaks of the most elevated goals - the divine’s want. And then, one can be set free of its own inner slavery into freedom. With joy, they are crowned with the highest slavery to the divine that is a crown of glory “a crown of refined gold upon his head”. The most highest of ideals,that soars high with no end, until the human eye can no longer see. Where speech and logic cannot gain enough control to call something by its name. When we reach those heights, there is no other option but to stand under the ultimate truth. There is no option to come down and mark anything using our own limited values. That is why we truly call it complete elevation, that rises up to infinite in the name of God’s will and doing God’s work (or worshiping God YT). It’s true that only there is a level that can only be achieved by the individual mental and ideal ascension, as far as it can reach, and after the rich particular mental images, both in idea and practice. And only after the definite understanding that everything that is high and elevated in our imagination has a limit, and that inside the human spirit there is a longing for everything, there is a yearning for all that is above all reason; higher than all measure. And after completely accepting that all good actions are weaved into the general life of the world, and each generation has a singular part out of the infinite path rising up. But said rise, the complete elevation which is ideal in its definite color, can only be found in the divine treasure of life. In it can also be found the highest good that is not restricted in any form, but also all of the ‘smaller’ and ‘minor’ goods. And they are all combined and align with the divine desire that is utterly complete. After all of that, the practical and social life must elevate to the noblest degrees of the uttermost pure thought, one that is more moderate and refined, that rises above all the smallness that is to be found in the life that the masses are condemned to. They have dragged down their greatest authors and thinkers, and now, they too, along with the masses, think that any higher truth or logic, any that is higher than their depths of violence, chaos, and ignorance, they all must be disconnected from real life. But in truth, only the path that turns to the higher aspect of thought and ideals, only it can shed a light on life and fill them with shine and glow. Only that path will return life to its natural foundation that is hidden within every heart and soul. "קול רנה וצהלה באהלי צדיקים ימין ד' עושה חיל ימין ד' רוממה, ימין ד' עושה חיל". The tents of the victorious resound with joyous shouts of deliverance,“The right hand of the LORD is triumphant(Psalms. 118, 15)All of the natural inclinations are standing ready to fulfill the divine, just, and enlighten role. And all mental thoughts are projecting their light to all the land of the living of "אורח צדיקים כאור נוגה ההולך ואור עד נכון היום"“The path of the righteous is like radiant sunlight,Ever brightening until noon.”(proverbs, 4, 18)And so, there is no desolate force, no dark though. Everything is illuminated, it is all alive and ready and willing to serve alongside the archangels and to sing with the angels of heaven. To satiate every living being and to increase the general and individual happiness of the Joy of God in his creations. As the creations are elevated, when they are happy and filled with splendor, there is no sadness and grief, no devil and no demon, only the cover (Sukkah YT) of peace and honor that reaches every sense of life, every inclination and thought, every act and project. And they are all contacting together, so the generation and the nation, both general and individual,  will be built from them. , "איש חי רב פעלים מקבצאל שריבה וקבץ פעלים לתורה"“A man of valor of Kabzeel, that had increased and joined together actions into torah” (Brachot 18 B, based on Shmuel 2, 23, 20)There is no war it cannot carry, whatever great force, be it combined with the strongest of the hindrance, will be won by them. And they will use anything that could help them to increase their might, honor, and majesty”, הוא הכה את שני אריאל מואב, והוא ירד והכה את הארי בתוך הבור ביום השלג, והוא הכה את איש מצרי איש מראה וביד המצרי חנית וירד אליו בשבט, ויגזול את החנית מיד המצרי ויהרגהו בחניתו". “He killed the two [sons] of Ariel of Moab.-e Once, on a snowy day, he went down into a pit and killed a lion.He also killed an Egyptian, a huge man. The Egyptian had a spear in his hand, yet [Benaiah] went down against him with a club, wrenched the spear out of the Egyptian’s hand, and killed him with his own spear.(II Samuel 23:21-22)And as it is for the individual, so it is for the collective. When the right path for them is to walk in the lower ranks of general ethics, then even though that path is low, dark, and filled with the chaos of wars, and with all the weight that path brings, the tools to fix it are ready in front of it. The forces of evil are conquered, the upper hand will belong to the straight, justice, good , and the resilience. All of these will stand while they conquer evil, and they are abundant in war and victory both alone and together, while they are using bitter medication in order to get them to stand up on their feet. But regardless, strength and justice are at their side. Such is Judaism outside of the land of Israel, it cannot be completed and fully pure, cause in the end “"כל הדר בחו"ל דומה הוא כמי שאין לו אלה"-All those who live outside of Israel are as if they have no God (Ketubot 110 B)There, in the valley of the shadow of death, there is no option to go about life without aspiring to a complete life, since the social and national lives outside of the land of Israel are poisonous. The air of the lands of the nations gives life to those other nations that can find in it what they seek. They can construct all of their higher tendencies. But the people of Israel will not find there even one of its own unique and important ideals. And that is why our people have to be “limp on his hip”, focus their desires only on fulfilling their individual needs - only what must be done in order to nourish ourselves. And since the air outside of Israel contaminates the Israeli mind and heart, the only possible path is that of the general conquering way. The most plausible path that would lead us to our desires - over there.
But that is not the path needed for the generation of “Ikva Di’Meshicha’ (in the heels of the Mashiach,based on Sota chapter 9, Mishna 15). The Torah for that generation must be drawn from the land of the living - from the place of the house of our lives.
The Knesset of Israel, the people of Israel, has awoken in their connection to the desire of the younger generation. Are powers have awakened in a manner that is both magnificent and bewildering. There is no option to conquer and subdue them, only to elevate them, show them a path of great light and majesty....
In that, the hand of God is open towards us, as we see that the Knesset of Israel has already cured a bit of its ethical ailments in the heart of the soul. Ailments that have been with us since the first generations. The long and horrible diaspora with all its horrible tortures, has acted as an iron forge, aggregating and purifying. "כאש מצרף וכבורית מכבסים" As smelter’s fire and like fuller’s lye (Malachi 3:2). The horrible need, and the troubles that are more than the human strength can stand, especially those that came on these times were like whips filled with a scorching fire that bleaches, polish, purify, and exacerbate the heart made of stone. "המלח ממתקת את הבשר ויסורין ממרקין כל גופו של אדם".the salt sweetens the taste of the meat and renders it edible, so too in the covenant mentioned with regard to suffering, the suffering cleanses a person’s transgressions (Berakhot 5a).And as goes the judgment of the individual, so it goes for the nation, she too has been polished and purified. The heart is a new and pure heart, the kidneys are prepared for all that is high, elevated and holy.While none of this has translated from potential to actuality, that process, which is hidden in the heart of the nation and its concealed powers, is the job and purpose of the wiseman of the generation, the pious (tzadikim),geniuses, preachers, the wise, and authors. Alongside them, with an even higher degree for generations to come, those who will sing with the spirit of God on his nation - prophets, seers, heroes. All according to the future ascension, one step after another."התנערי מעפר קומי שבי ירושלם".“Arise, shake off the dust,Sit [on your throne], Jerusalem!” (Isaiah 52:2)
Yet, it is visible to the naked eye that the inner light of justice, the general honesty and the pure national love breaths fire that multiplies and rises in the heart of the young generation - in the best of them. Their potential has yet to be manifested since all of the usual explanations of the ways of Judaism, of the  most fundamental basic aspects of it, are enough only for those who are meant to conquer, that softening their hearts is how they become complete. Those who find their glory and praise are found in shrinking their forces. But all of these explanations are not enough to those who are already filled with the strength of youth, whose essence of life has room for the light of overall justice - the more inner and high unique trait of Israel - to be illuminating while roaring as the sea roars to the waves, as they wash with their strength through life like a flowing river.
For them we need to learn a living torah straight from the source of life. Paths of ethics filled with light and joy. Words of beauty and good sense, purified and forged, picked and marked. Once they will receive them, they will find the completion to all of their ideals, the greatness of their higher and most elevated wishes.Those ideals and wishes are compatible with the force, glory, might, and splendor of the treasure of life - a Torah of life. There’s no reason for us to want to oppress them beneath our feet, we will not wish to fetter their young,fresh, charging, elevated powers. For we will light the path in front of them, we will walk in front of them as a pillar of fire of Torah and with the view of the holy giants of strength of heart. We will understand their opinions and discourse, we will know to cherish their inner inhibitions, and their natural self tendencies that come from the source of Israel. These are strong people, the fiercest of the nations.
Girded with might, adorned with glory. And they in return will know how to respect us. How to carry on with warmth a heart full of love and precious logic. They will carry on every word and sentence the comes from the well of living water, the treasure of the soul of Knesset Israel that wishes to revive with its resurrection the entirety of man -"בית יעקב לכו ונלכה באור ד'".“O House of Jacob! Come, let us walk By the light of GOD.” (Isaiah, 2,5)
In such a way of life, where we will have more of those who truly commit to the holy work, of those pave paths and steer roads, the glory and magnificence of the generation of our childrens will be revealed and seen. The fierce love our children hold towards our nation and our holy land will present itself and will elevate and present a recognition and true emotions of the love of our shepherd, the shepherd of Israel, the god of the world, the rock of Yaakov "אמצאך בשוק אשקך גם לא יבוזו לי", “Then I could kiss you When I met you in the street, And no one would despise me”(Song of Songs 8,1) And love for a Torah of life. That is the symbol of our covenant, for a land of life and for a nation of virtue (עם סגולה - A’m Segula) "זה יאמר לד' אני, וזה יקרא בשם יעקב, וזה יכתב ידו לד' ובשם ישראל יכנה". One shall say, “I am GOD’s,”Another shall use the name of “Jacob,”Another shall mark his arm “of GOD” And adopt the name of “Israel.”(Isaiah 44,5) No more will they be ashamed to be called in that name in front of the whole enlightened world. For they will know the strength and truth that lies in them. And the heart of the fathers will begin to recognize that good treasure and the virtue that is hidden in the children, in the depths of their vivid awakened souls. And the children will recognize the holiness and the purity, the majesty and glory that fills the hearts of the fathers. For those fathers themselves took all of these as the inheritance from generations upon generations by keeping the holiness of the Torah and its commandments and by the inner adherence after the name of God the god of Israel, who reside in Zion and chose Jerusalem. And each will take the best from their counterpart, all that is fine and kosher. And after the shining of the light of wisdom, bravery, strength, and humility from both sides, all of these will lead to the loyal understanding that salvation will come and the redemption will rise only from the spiritual unification of the young Israel with the elder Israel. 
ואשים דברי בפיך ובצל ידי כסיתיך ינטע שמים וליסוד ארץ ולאמר לציון עמי אתה. Have put My words in your mouth And sheltered you with My hand; I, who planted the skies and made firm the earth,Have said to Zion: You are My people! (Ishia 51:16)...
רוחי אשר עליך ודברי אשר שמתי בפיך לא ימושו מפיך ומפי זרעך ומפי זרע זרעך אמר ד' מעתה ועד עולם.And this shall be My covenant with them, said GOD: My spirit that is upon you, and the words that I have placed in your mouth, shall not be absent from your mouth, nor from the mouth of your children, nor from the mouth of your children’s children—said GOD—from now on, for all time.(Ishia 59:21)