Netivot Olam
נתיבות עולם
YU Torah miTzion Beit Midrash
http://www.torontotorah.com

Netivot Olam

Introduction to Netivot Olam



Netiv Hatorah



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15






































......




"The Tannaim who erode the world ... [are scholars who] establish law based on the Mishnah [without the Talmud] ...” Rashi of blessed memory explained (Sotah 22a), “they establish law based on the Mishnah – and erode the world with mistaken decisions, for since they don’t know the reasons for the Mishnah, they compare a case to cases that    are not alike. Furthermore, they don’t know about the disputes of the Tannaim and therefore issue mistaken decisions.” So explained Rashi ... However, the interpretation is not like [Rashi’s] words at all, for saying that they issue a halachic decision from the Mishnah, implies that their decision is true; one cannot call it a halachic decision if it is a mistake. It would have said “they  teach mistakes from the Mishnah.” Rather, the interpretation is as we have said: the essential Torah is in establishing halachah, and this should emerge from the Torah, as the Torah is intellectual, the intellectual Talmud [and not the Mishnah’s mere outline] from which practical law should emerge, and this sustains the world certainly. So the Tannaim  who decide halachah from Mishnah destroy the world. But nowadays, if people would decide halachah from the Mishnah that would be enough, for [at least] the Mishnah is the beginning of the Talmud ... Instead, they establish halachah from collections of rulings meant for practical guidance – which were made just to issue rulings, but not to learn from. This is even further evil. The Rishonim, such as Rambam and Tur of blessed memory, even though they also wrote their rulings without explanation, they just intended to provide practical rules, based on what emerges from the Talmud. However, for one to establish halachah from it without knowing where the law emerged from, as a law without reason – that never entered their mind! ... If the authors had known that their works would cause people to leave the Talmud and would [determine halachah from] their works – they never would have authored them.   For it is better and more proper to establish halachah from the Talmud, even if one is worried that he will not follow the true path and decide truthfully, than that his decision should be accurate. In any case, a wise man has only what his intellect gives him and he understands from the Talmud, and if his wisdom and understanding lead him astray, still it is beloved to G-d ...

Netiv Ha'Avodah



Netiv Gmilut Chasadim



Netiv Hatzdaka



Netiv Hadin



Netiv Haemet



Netiv Haemuna



Netiv Hashalom



Netiv Ahavat Reia



Netiv Haanava



Netiv Yirat Hashem



Netiv Halashon



Netiv Ahavat Hashem



Netiv Hashtika



Netiv Haprishut



Netiv Hatzniut



Netiv Koach Hayeitzer



Netiv Hatzedek



Netiv Hatshuva



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



‎“Rami Bar Chama said: Great is repentance, since it brings healing to the world, as it says, ‘Return ‎wayward sons, I will heal etc.’(Yirmiyahu 3:22) Rabbi Chama son of Chanina considered an apparent ‎contradiction of verses. It says, ‘Return wayward sons,’ [implying that] they were only wayward ‎initially, and it says, ‘I will heal you from your waywardness’ [implying that they are still wayward ‎after returning]! It is not a contradiction; here it is [referring to] repentance from love, and here it ‎is [referring to] repentance from fear.”(Yoma 86a) …‎ Know that repentance is possible for a person because a person is created initially without sin, and ‎when he returns to G-d the person returns to that initial state. Because of this it is appropriate for ‎repentance to bring healing to the world, because healing is also a return to one’s initial state. ‎When people repent and return to their beginnings, the world also returns to its beginning and ‎‎[this] mends all the ruin that exists in the world.‎ Therefore, he said, ‘Great is repentance, since it brings healing to the world,’ [that is to say] when ‎the world cleaves to its beginnings, understand this. And he also said, ‘It says, ‘Return wayward ‎sons’ implying that they were only wayward initially.’ That is to say that as soon as he returns he is ‎healed, for this it is what is written, ‘Return wayward sons.’ And it is written, ‘I will heal you from ‎your waywardness’ [implying that] they need healing. He answers that this (the first case) is by ‎means of love, because one who returns to G-d out of love is certainly healed immediately upon ‎returning, because by means of the love his repentance is complete. And if he returns because of ‎fear his repentance is incomplete and he requires healing from G-d.‎ This is the difference between one who serves (G-d) out of love and one who serves out of fear. ‎Because the one who serves out of love possesses love and cleaving to G-d which is rooted in ‎himself… But the one who serves out of fear, this fear is rooted in G-d and therefore his final ‎healing comes from G-d and not from himself. These matters must be understood very well.‎

Netiv Hayisurin



Netiv Hazrizut



Netiv Hatochacha



Netiv Habusha



Netiv Hatmimut



Netiv Lev Tov



Netiv Ayin Tov



Netiv Haleitzanut



Netiv Haosher



Netiv Habitachon



Netiv Hakaas



Netiv Hanedivut



Netiv Sheim Tov



Netiv Derech Eretz

