Sefat Emet
שפת אמת
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Sefat Emet

Genesis

Bereshit



Section 1




Rashi quotes "Rabbi Yitzhak said: The Torah should have started at "From this very month..."...the first mitzvah...[because of] 'the strength of His deeds...". One must understand the solution given regarding all of the Torah portions from Bereshit until "...this very month". The interpretation of the matter is that the essence of the Torah is the mitzvot--this is the written Torah--but the Holy Blessed One wanted to clarify that this world and the entire Creation [exists] because of the 'power of Torah', as it says "B-reishit": He looked within the Torah and created the world [according to it]." And this matter [is in contrast] with Oral Torah, which is dependent on human activity. Thus, all the Torah portions concerned with the stories of forefathers [are there] to show how Torah was created by their deeds. This is what is meant by "the strength of His deeds"--the power that the Holy Blessed One suffused within Creation. This is why it is called "the work/deed of Creation" to declare that the world was created with ten utterances, and the life-force of the world by means of the Torah. The task of humanity, then, is to understand that every deed is a result of the Holy Blessed One's life-force. When a person performs any action, it is [only] because of the power of Torah to fulfill the will of the Creator, thus renewing the light hidden within Creation. This is hinted at in the verse "I have put my words in your mouth...who laid the foundations of the earth and say to Zion 'You are my people'." The sages interpret the verse: Don't read ami/my people--rather immi/with me, as a partner in the work of Creation. The Zohar interprets 'Zion' as the inner point within all things as a imprint and sign to remember that the Holy One is the [the source] all things. This is the life-force which animates all things. The person who clings to this inner point and all of His life-force which flows from this point becomes a partner in the work of Creation. As a result of this ..."in order that He might give them the inheritance of the nations”--an inheritance without restraints. When a person joins the natural world to its active potential, nature cannot obscure the power of holiness. 

Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



For Chanuka



Vayigash



Vayechi



Exodus

Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Section 1



Section 2



Section 3



Section 4



Section 5



Section 6



Section 7



Section 8



Section 9



Section 10



Section 11



Section 12



Section 13



Section 14



Section 15



Section 16



Section 17



Section 18

5650
In the verse, 'Thus shall you say' etc., for the 'women [...] with gentle language' etc., 'and tell [...] harsh matters'. And there's a difficulty, that with one expression being said, according to Rashi, 'in this language and in this order'. And perhaps one could say that really these words are for women and those who are lacking understanding. They are only words of encouragement how the Holy One, blessed be He, brought us close and uplifted us. But people that understand, know that this is not a small thing and that they are receiving with this, a great and awesome yoke to serve the Creator of the world and to clarify his kingdom, may it be blessed, in the world. And therefore it says with this expression and in this order that it was revealed before Him, may He be blessed, that with this expression each person will continue according to their path. The women with encouragement. And the men with an awesome undertaking. And in the Gemora we also find a disagreement whether commandments were given to us to derive benefit from. And the law is that they weren't given to us to derive benefit from, as mentioned above. 

Mishpatim



Parashat Shekalim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Section 1



Section 2


See Source Sheet "Lamps and Souls" by SaraLeya Schley
See Source Sheet "Lamps and Souls" by SaraLeya Schley

Section 3


See Source Sheet "Lamps and Souls" by SaraLeya Schley - 
See Source Sheet "Lamps and Souls" by SaraLeya Schley

Parashat Zachor



For Purim



Section 1



Section 2

5634
"And Mordechai returned to the gate of the king" etc. Our sages say, may their memory be blessed, that he returned to his sackcloth and his fasting. The explanation for 'and he returned' is that he returned in repentance. This is the way of the tzadik {righteous}, through which he is assisted by HaShem, may He be blessed. He subjugates himself further through the shame from before Him, may He be blessed. And Mordechai regretted that he caused the whole decree. And now HaShem, may He be blessed, did a kindness like this for him. He became further ashamed. And he returned/repented. Because certainly, repentance through the shame is not like that like before {one has shame}. That there are two (ways of gaining) humility. Firstly, through worthlessness {that a person understands that he is worthless}. And the second, through greatness as it is written elsewhere {that a person realises his greatness - who he is and what he has - and  realises that he doesn't deserve  any of it}. And this is the difference between a tzadik {righteous person} and a rasha {a wicked person} as it is written "and Haman went out etc." ... "happy and with a good heart" because of the feast. And this was his downfall. But by Mordechai it says 'and he returned/repented' as written above. Furthermore it is apparent that Mordechai knew that HaShem, may He be blessed, will certainly help the Jewish people as it is written "relief and deliverance" etc. And so it's written "and he knew all that had happened" etc. However through this way, that all tzadikim {righteous}, that even though they know of the salvation, nevertheless they are able to cry out with a truly complete heart as if they didn't know. And someone that isn't {on that level}, the true salvation isn't shown to him. And this is dependent on complete faith that one nullifies his intellect to HaShem, may He be blessed, and he knows and believes that there is no contradiction in any of this, that the salvation arrives through the outcry of man. Even though HaShem, may He be blessed, will not forsake the Jewish people, without question. Nevertheless it is necessary to cry out in a time of distress as it is written "a time of distress" etc. and from that, one will be saved.

Ki Tisa



Parashat Parah



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Leviticus

Vayikra



Parashat HaChodesh



Tzav



For Shabbat HaGadol



Passover



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Bechukotai



Numbers

Bamidbar



Shavuot



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Deuteronomy

Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



For the Month of Elul



Rosh HaShanah



Shabbat Shuva



For the Day of Atonement



Ha'Azinu



Sukkot



V'Zot HaBerachah

