Sefat Emet
שפת אמת
YU Torah miTzion Beit Midras
http://www.torontotorah.com

Sefat Emet

Genesis

Bereshit



Noach



Lech Lecha



Vayera



Chayei Sara



Toldot



Vayetzei



Vayishlach



Vayeshev



Miketz



For Chanuka



Vayigash



Vayechi



Exodus

Shemot



Vaera



Bo



Beshalach



Yitro



Mishpatim



Parashat Shekalim



Terumah



Tetzaveh



Parashat Zachor



For Purim



Ki Tisa



Parashat Parah



Vayakhel



Pekudei



Leviticus

Vayikra



Parashat HaChodesh



Tzav



For Shabbat HaGadol



Passover



Shmini



Tazria



Metzora



Achrei Mot



Kedoshim



Emor



Behar



Section 1



Section 2



Section 3



Section 4



Section 5



Section 6



Section 7



Section 8



Section 9



Regarding the verse (Vayikra 25:55) “The Children of Israel are servants to Me; they are my servants…” My claim came before [any other claim]. This is still true today, for according to the level at which one accepts the yoke of Heaven, enslavement to governments is removed, as our sages have taught (Avot 3:5), “One who accepts the yoke of Torah, has the yoke of government removed.” There are also roles of servant and child… [The roles of servant and child] parallel the aspects of Torah and commandments, for one who engages in Torah [as a child of G-d] is free. (Avot 6:2) However, everyone must accept the yoke of Heaven and of commandments upon themselves [as a servant]. This is the meaning of the verse, “They are My servants”, as it is written “Israel, in whom I am glorified.” (Isaiah 49:3) It is glorious for G-d when Israel accepts servitude to Him, despite being His children. It is not only praise of Israel, but it is also true testimony to the Creator… There are always levels of servant and child, servant and child, in that the greater one’s grasp of the secrets of the King [as G-d’s child], the more one lowers one’s self to accept the yoke of Heaven as a servant. Consequently, one merits to see and grasp, as a child, and then one returns to being a servant… In Nisan, we become free and receive the yoke of Heaven. All the days of the Sefirah, we are like servants, doing His will, until we achieve seven complete weeks, which is the oath we swore and in which we have stood since Mount Sinai. We then merit on Shavuot to receive the Torah, like children who search through the vaults of the king. However, we then return to being servants, which is Sukkot, when we return and repent on Rosh HaShanah and Yom Kippur, and accept the yoke of Heaven anew, which is the glory mentioned above, as the Holy One finds glory in them…Similarly, daily, one accepts the yoke of Heaven [as a servant] in the morning and thereby merits Torah [as a child] according to his level. And at night, one returns to accept the yoke of Heaven. And the level of the “second servant” is greater, as can be understood.

Bechukotai



Numbers

Bamidbar



Shavuot



Nasso



Beha'alotcha



Sh'lach



Korach



Chukat



Balak



Pinchas



Matot



Masei



Deuteronomy

Devarim



Vaetchanan



Eikev



Re'eh



Shoftim



Ki Teitzei



Ki Tavo



Nitzavim



Vayeilech



For the Month of Elul



Rosh HaShanah



Shabbat Shuva



For the Day of Atonement



Ha'Azinu



Sukkot



V'Zot HaBerachah

