Yizkor
יזכור
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Yizkor

'Yizkor' for a father:
Remember, God, the soul of my father, my teacher (the name of the father, son of the name of his father), who went to his world, because I will - without making a vow - give charity for him. In recompense for this, let his soul be bound up in the bond of life, with the soul of Avraham, Yitzchak and Ya'akov, Sarah, Rivkah, Rachel and Leah, and with the other righteous men and women in the Garden of Eden. And let us say, Amen. 
'Yizkor' for a mother:
Remember, God, the soul of my mother, my teacher (the name of the mother, daughter of the name of her father), who went to her world, because I will - without making a vow - give charity for her. In recompense for this, let her soul be bound up in the bond of life, with the soul of Avraham, Yitzchak and Ya'akov, Sarah, Rivkah, Rachel and Leah, and with the other righteous men and women in the Garden of Eden. And let us say, Amen. 
'Yizkor' for a relative:
Remember, God, the soul of (my grandfathers and grandmothers [literally, male and female elders], my uncles and aunts, my brothers and sisters, my husband, my wife) (the name of the departed, son [or daughter] of the name of his [or her] father), who went to his world, because I will - without making a vow - give charity for him. In recompense for this, let his [or her] soul be bound up in the bond of life, with the soul of Avraham, Yitzchak and Ya'akov, Sarah, Rivkah, Rachel and Leah, and with the other righteous men and women in the Garden of Eden. And let us say, Amen. 
'Yizkor' for those that died for <i>Kiddush Hashem</i> [the Sanctification of God's name]:
Remember, God, the holy and pure souls of (all of my male relatives and female relatives, whether from my father's side [or] whether from my mother's side), those that were killed, those that were exterminated, those that were slaughtered and burned and drowned and asphyxiated for the sanctification of God's name, because I will - without making a vow - give charity for the memory of their souls. In recompense for this, let their souls be bound up in the bond of life, with the souls of Avraham, Yitzchak and Ya'akov, Sarah, Rivkah, Rachel and Leah, and with the other righteous men and women in the Garden of Eden. And let us say, Amen. 
'El Maleh Rechamim' Prayer for a Male:
O Power, full of mercy, who dwells on high, establish proper rest upon the wings of the Divine Presence, on the levels of the holy and pure ones [who] shine like the splendor of the firmament, [for] the soul of (the name of the departed, son of the name of his father) who went to his world, because I will - without making a vow - give charity for the memory of his soul; let his rest be in the Garden of Eden. Hence, Master of mercy, cover him in the cover of His wings forever and bind his soul with the Binding of life (God). God is his inheritance and let him rest upon his place of repose in peace. And let us say Amen. 
'El Maleh Rachamim' Prayer for a Female:
O Power, full of mercy, who dwells on high, establish proper rest upon the wings of the Divine Presence, on the levels of the holy and pure ones [who] shine like the splendor of the firmament, [for] the soul of (the name of the departed, daughter of the name of her father) who went to her world, because I will - without making a vow - give charity for the memory of her soul; let her rest be in the Garden of Eden. Hence, Master of mercy, cover her in the cover of His wings forever and bind her soul with the Binding of life (God). God is her inheritance and let her rest in peace upon her place of repose. And let us say Amen.
Prayer for the Victims of the Holocaust:
Our Father, our King, God of the spirits of all flesh, give proper rest upon the wings of the Divine Presence, on the levels of the holy and pure ones [who] shine like the splendor of the firmament, [for] the souls of the six million Jews, men and women, boys and girls, that were exterminated and slaughtered and asphyxiated and buried alive by the hands of monsters in the exile of Europe. All of them are holy and pure; among them were luminaries and righteous people, 'cedars of Lebanon' and giants of Torah. Let their rest be in the Garden of Eden. Therefore, Master of mercy, bind their souls with the bond of life. God is their inheritance. And remember for us their sacrifice and let their merit stand for us and for all of Israel. Let the earth not cover their blood and let there not be a place [sufficient] for their cries. In their merit, let the dispersed of Israel return to their possession; and let the holy ones be an everlasting memory - their righteousness in front of Your eyes. May they come to peace, [and] rest upon their places of repose. And let us say: Amen.
Remember, God, all of the souls of all of the congregations of the House of Israel in the exile of Europe, that were raised upon the pyre during the years of the Holocaust, 5700-5705. Six million men and women, boys and girls, youths and maidens, the old and the infant, that were exterminated and slaughtered with terrible cruelty and murdered, through mass murder in the places of their residence, in cities and in villages; and the remainder transported to concentration camps and slain with terrible and strange ways of killing and burnt to ashes in the fiery ovens of the terrible extermination camps in Germany and in Poland and in other lands; by the hands of the murderous German nation together with their helpers, the murderers from other nations, who were of one mind to destroy, to exterminate, and to do away with the Jewish people, and to erase the memory of Judaism, and to terminate all who are called by the name of Israel. 
Power of vengeances, Judge of the earth, please remember the rivers of blood that were spilled like water, the blood of fathers and sons, mothers and their babes, our rabbis and their students; and pay back upon the enemies of Your people seven times their due. Let not the invocation of 'Shema Yisrael' be silent from those that were taken to [their] death; and raise up the howls of the tortured ones in front of the throne of Your honor, to - speedily in our days and in front of our eyes - avenge the blood of Your holy and pure sons and daughters, who did not merit to [receive] a Jewish funeral. As it is written (Deuteronomy 32:43), "for the blood of His servants will He avenge, and He will pay back vengeance on His enemies, and His land will atone for His people." 
For the fallen from the battles of Israel:
Remember, God, the souls of the soldiers of the Israeli Defense Forces who gave their lives for the sanctification of God's Name and fell as heroes in the battles of Israel for the sake of our land, the city of God, and the site of the Temple. They were lighter than eagles and stronger than lions, in their going out to produce a permanent victory for Israel. The memory of their sacrifice and their acts of heroism will never stop for us; and let their souls be bound up in the bond of life, with the souls of Avraham, Yitzchak and Ya'akov and with the souls of other heroes of Israel and its holy ones in the Garden of Eden. And let us say, Amen. 
To be said after 'Yizkor' from the battles of Israel:
God, full of mercy, who dwells on high, establish proper rest upon the wings of the Divine Presence, on the levels of the holy and pure ones [who] shine like the splendor of the firmament, for the souls of the soldiers of the Israeli Defense Forces who fell in the wars of Israel, and all of the fighters of the battles of the people who were willing to die for the sanctification of God's name, and with the help of the God of battles of Israel brought about the revival of the nation and the state and the deliverance of the land and the city of God.  Master of mercy, cover them in the cover of [God's] wings forever and bind their souls with the Binding of Life. God is their inheritance; may their rest be in the Garden of Eden and let them rest in peace upon their places of repose, and let them stand for their fate in the end of days. And let us say: Amen. 