Sefer Yesodei HaTorah
ספר יסודי התורה
Translated by R. Shraga Silverstein
https://www.sefaria.org/shraga-silverstein

Sefer Yesodei HaTorah

First Introduction



Second Introduction







Chapter 1

"Religion" came to the children of Israel as an inheritance from their fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and not as a teaching from Moses. As Moses said to them when he came to them (Shemoth 2:15) "The L-rd, the G-d of your fathers, the G-d of Abraham, the G-d of Isaac, and the G-d of Jacob, sent me to you." What was that religion? Moses did not apprise them of it explicitly, there being no need of his doing so for the men of his generation, who already knew it. But for the benefit of future generations, he apprised us of its <i>nature</i> by recording within it ["by word of G-d"] events from the lives of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and his sons. From these, we see that they believed in One G-d, Possessor of heaven and earth, Judge of all the earth, Shield of those who fear Him, bestowing upon them goodly reward, and requiting the evil with the work of their hands. From there we see that they believed in signs and wonders, and angels, and prophecy, and that they were concerned about where they would be buried (whence we infer that they believed in the eternity of the soul and in the resurrection of the dead.) We find them praying to G-d in all of their tribulations — for others as well (e.g., Abraham for Avimelech). They vowed unto Him, and when He saved them, they thanked Him and offered sacrifices to Him. "The way of the L-rd" commanded by Abraham to "his children and his household after him" was "to do righteousness and judgment" (viz. Bereshith 18:19).

Chapter 2

After Abraham through his own understanding and in the uprightness of his heart abandoned the idols of his fathers and believed in one G-d, the L-rd chose him, revealed Himself to him, and blessed him. All this, "because he commands his children and his household after him to keep the way of the L-rd." That is, He did not choose him for himself alone, but to be the father of a holy people. And so that his seed not assimilate with the other peoples, who were idolators, He commanded him concerning circumcision, which, (at that time) was the only Divine precept in that religion. After some time, the children of Israel took upon themselves the stringency of not eating the thigh sinew in commemoration of the miracle performed for their father Jacob, at which time the honorific title of "Israel" was conferred upon him, (viz. Bereshith 32:29-33).

Chapter 3

This religion sufficed for the children of Israel as long as they were only one family. But when they became a great nation and the time arrived to bring them to the land that the L-rd had sworn to their fathers to give to them, He saw that they required teachings and judgments, learning and proper guidance, whether for character improvement towards the well-being of society, or for the preservation of this religion, that they not abandon it and adhere to the ways of the nations around them or be left without religion at all. It is for this reason that He gave them this Torah, which Moses placed before the children of Israel.

Chapter 4

The means which the L-rd chose towards the attainment of these two ends are one which is specific for character improvement, and two which are specific for character improvement and preservation of the religion as one. And they (these means) are the three foundations of the Torah of Moses.

Chapter 5

The first foundation, the means specific for character improvement, is compassion. The trait of compassion was implanted in a man from the beginning of his creation, and it is the root of his love, his lovingkindness, and his uprightness. It is that alone which leads us to the doing of good not in order to receive reward, neither naturally or unnaturally, neither in this world or in the world to come. For the trait of compassion is reward in itself. For the compassionate one suffers in the suffering of his friend and is not at peace until his friend's break is bound and his wound is healed.

Chapter 6

The Greek sages and the other philosophers who followed in their footsteps thought to found character improvement on many factors other than this (compassion); but they simply spouted words and produced no fruit.

Chapter 7

Some sought to teach men that the pursuit of lust results in no enduring good, but only in what is illusory and transitory and ends in affliction and in suffering. And all this is true. But the knowledge of this thing is powerless to enable a man to overcome his lusts! For the flame of desire will not allow him (especially one in the vigor of his youth and the heat of his temperament) to think in his heart how the thing will end. And there are also many others, who, though they know that in the way that they go they will not achieve peace of mind and tranquility of soul, still, a life of turbulence, tumult, and tempest saturated with delight and desire is choicer in their eyes than a quiet life devoid of tempests and great pleasure; and the chastisements of wisdom will not aid or avail them. For in truth, the L-rd did not make all men in the same mould, and His wisdom did not decree that one thing should afford equal satisfaction and pleasure to all. And just as it is not to be expected that all men ply the same trade, so it is not to be expected that they all choose one life style. And just as some choose to be land dwellers and other to spend most of their days on the open sea, and just as some choose to dwell in peace and security and others exult in weaponry and rejoice in the trumpet blast of war, so it is in the nature of man that some choose the tranquility of silence amidst a modicum of joy, trouble, and sorrow, and others a life replete with tempest and turmoil and the bread of toil tinctured with lusts and delights. And those sages who would have all men walk the path of wisdom and understanding run counter to nature — that is, to the will of the Creator. And that is why most men do not pay heed to them.

Chapter 8

Others taught that the welfare of society dictates that its members walk the just path, wherefore it follows that each man should do so and seek the welfare of society. And this is doubtless true. But how will this effect the character improvement of each individual? Is there not room for the "adversary" to contend: You, the philosopher, tell me that all the members of society should improve their deeds. For if they fail to do so, their aggregate will suffer and each individual will "swallow the other alive." See, now, your words are good and right. How good and pleasant it would be if all men, like brothers as one, would "pursue righteousness and love truth and peace!" But as far as I can see most of the men in my circle are bent on their own profit! If I alone were to cling to righteousness and justness, woe unto me! "The righteous one would go lost in his righteousness!" And even worse than this is the reaction of those wicked men who justify with their mouths the words of the aforementioned sages and parrot with their lips that righteousness and justness are the mainsprings of society, but who in the recesses of their hearts counsel evil to make themselves exceptions to the rule and to deviate from the ways of justness whenever it suits their purpose to do so. And if the (aforementioned) sages attempt to convince them that the good of the individual cannot be served at the expense of that of the community, their words are to no avail. For "a man believes only what <i>his</i> eyes see." And if in his heart he really believes that what is to the detriment of society is to <i>his</i> good and welfare, how can he be expected to heed his teachers and despise what in his own mind is to his good — especially when the very essence of the teaching of his masters is that one must seek the good of society <i>to advance his own good</i>!

Chapter 9

Others made their criterion the equality of men, saying that what is permitted to Reuven should be permitted to Shimon. For both being human beings, one should enjoy no advantage over the other. Accordingly, if theft, robbery, and murder are permitted to Reuven, they should likewise be permitted to Shimon. And so long as Reuven acknowledges that these are forbidden to Shimon, he should likewise acknowledge that they are forbidden to him — unless he can prove that Shimon is not a man as he is. And this, too, is true. But "the gates of repentance" are not closed to the evil inclination. For the churl can say in his heart: This "equality" is a figment of the imagination. For nature has differentiated one man from another as to strength and to intellect. And since nature has desired that I be strong and my neighbor weak, that I be a sage and my neighbor a fool, it follows, likewise, that it desires that my lot be superior to his and that the same lot not befall both of us. If so, if I steal or rob from him and gain the upper hand over him in all ways, I do not thereby exceed my bounds or breach a border or break a fence, but I simply enjoy the goodly gift vouchsafed me by nature in its graciousness to me. And if it were as the sages say, that power, strength, and wisdom do not accord more rights to one man than to another, how can it be that all the nations of the world agree that in the event of a conflict between one nation and another their <i>right</i> is to be affirmed by bow, sword, war, and strength of arms!

Chapter 10

Others have made honor their criterion, instructing the populace to distance itself from any unseemly thing resulting in shame and humiliation and to choose only those seemly, praiseworthy things which accord honor to their practitioners, saying "What is the just way that a man should choose? All that is becoming to its doers and evocative of the admiration of others." This precept is, indeed, effective for external enhancement of character, but not for inner enhancement. For it is well known that not all the deeds of men, nor even most of them, are visible to the public, and very often a man is guilty of wrong and violence or negligent in the doing of good without this redounding to his shame or humiliation. And there are many men who glory in their craftiness and cunning, notwithstanding which their ways are not good and their hidden deeds, ugly and detestable. 

Chapter 11

Others say that man was singled out from other creatures by the gift of G-d — intellect — which includes within it the categorical imperative to choose good and to shun evil. And what are those men to do who are not sensible of this imperative? And if it <i>were</i> implanted in all men, how are we to explain the preponderance of evil on the face of the earth? 

Chapter 12

Others say that the happenstances of man are not good and bad in truth, and that it is the wise <i>tzaddik</i> alone who can experience true happiness, who, even if he is beset by many evils and afflictions suffers no lessening of peace and good. But how far are most mortals from subscribing to such a teaching! And of what benefit is it to the ear that cannot hear it!

Chapter 13

Others say that a man must heed the dictates of nature. Now nature has made man societal, requiring the company of his fellow men. It follows, then, that <i>nature</i> demands that a man order his ways and deeds to promote the amelioration of society and the maintenance of the societal framework. And if he is corrupt in his deeds, he thereby undermines society and its framework and defies the dictates of nature. But what does the wicked one say? What is this? Why should I heed the precepts of the universal nature and cast those of my own nature behind my back! When I steal, and philander, and kill, is it not my own nature that does this? And if I desist from doing this, is it not my own nature that I defy? And the ordeal that I undergo in overcoming my inclination — is it not chastising me for defying the will of nature?

Chapter 14

Others desire closeness to G-d, saying it befits a man to despise all the affairs of this world and to devote his thoughts exclusively to the attainment of wisdom and to the knowledge of his Creator. But is it possible for all men or even most of them to follow this path? And even if one in a thousand attains to this level, does he thereby avail his fellow men? Would he not find it demeaning to concern himself with their affairs as he finds it demeaning to tend to his own? And, furthermore, it is not likely that such a man would be gentle to others and good and beloved by them, their being lowly in his eyes and he alone lofty and exalted — all of them "beasts," and he alone a man.

Chapter 15

These (the aforementioned) are a sampling of the ways of the sages of Greece and of those who follow in their footsteps, the chief of their teachings in their attempt to build the edifice of character improvement. If I attempted to enumerate all of them individually, they would outnumber the sands (of the sea). Their common denominator is that they are of no great benefit in leading the populace on the path of virtue, their teachings not being based on the natural foundation that is in truth common to <i>all</i> men.

Chapter 16

However, the feeling of compassion <i>is</i> found in truth, to a greater or lesser extent, in all men. Clear proof of this: We find that the "hard of heart," who are far from charity and who spend their days in reveling and tippling keep at a distance from themselves the poor and the indigent and all who are "smitten by G-d" and afflicted. Why is this so? Because the sight and the sighs of these unfortunate ones dampens their joy and brings to their hearts (against their will) sadness and sorrow, whether more or less. Why is this so if not for the fact that compassion is natural to all men and felt even by the hard of heart! It cannot be denied that many chance factors can weaken this compassion and mercy in a man and render him cruel and hard-hearted, but all this is chance and not nature. If we have seen or heard of men becoming mercilessly cruel to their friends, this was only because of hatred, wrath, and vengefulness, which may unbalance a man and drive him out of his mind or because of some sudden impulse to attain their desire. But it is not to be denied that even those who seem the most hard-hearted of men are sometimes compassionate and merciful.

Chapter 17

Now the feeling of compassion itself suffices to make a man a doer of good and a shunner of evil. For if one is pained by the pain of his neighbor and by his distress, there is no doubt that he will not cause harm to him, but, to the contrary, he will exert himself to be kind to all men and to be of help to them in rescuing them from evil. And from compassion, there stems, too, the love of righteousness and justice. For when I see two men unknown to me, I am equally compassionate to both of them, wherefore I will not do good to one which will result in the other's harm, but I will aspire to the equality of their lot. And if I see one of them stealing from the other, I will desire to "snatch the prey" from his mouth and restore it to his neighbor.

Chapter 18

Therefore, if we wish to guide a child on the right path and to render our guidance truly effective in improving his character, we need only seek to add power and might to the feeling of compassion implanted in his heart. And this, in both speech and deed. For just as if we habituate him to seeing acts of cruelty and hearing the praises of the stout-hearted, there is no doubt that compassion will wane in his heart, and little by little the child will become a hard man, bold of heart, so, if we habituate him to seeing acts of compassion and lovingkindness and to hearing the praises of lovingkindness and compassion and the denunciation of bold-heartedness and hard-heartedness, there will grow in his heart the trait of compassion and mercy and the child will grow to be a man of compassion and mercy, righteous, just, and faithful.

Chapter 19

Now this Torah, which Moses set before the children of Israel, guides us in the path of compassion and graciousness: by its commanding us to leave <i>leket</i> (gleanings, viz. Vayikra 19:9), <i>shikchah</i> (the forgotten sheaf, viz. Devarim 24:19), and <i>peah</i> (the corner of the field, viz. Shemoth 22:27) to the poor and to the proselyte, to the orphan and to the widow, by forbidding us to take interest or increase from the indigent or to enter his house to take his pledge (for our loan to him), by forbidding us to take in pledge mill or upper millstone or the garment of a widow, and by commanding us (Shemoth 22:25) "If you take as a pledge your neighbor's garment, return it to him before the sun sets." Reflect upon what follows (Ibid. 26) "for it is his only clothing, his covering for his skin. In what shall he sleep?" Now if a creditor has lent his neighbor money and sees that the time (for repayment) has passed, and he has not been paid, it is his right to take a pledge. And if the debtor gives him nothing else as security, he may take his garment. And if every evening he must return it to him, there is no question that he will not be repaid. (The creditor thinks to himself:) "If he asked me for it as a gift, perhaps I might have given it to him. But he borrowed on condition to repay, and now that he does not repay, he is a deceiver, who seeks to rob and defraud his friend. And now that I have taken his garment as a pledge, why should I return it? How shall I otherwise get back from him what I have lent him? What concern is it of mine in what he shall sleep?" Thus will the creditor think. And all the philosophers and proponents of honor will agree with him. But the Torah teaches compassion and kindness and says to the creditor "In what shall he sleep?" Similarly, since the Torah has commanded the remission of debts in the seventh year (shemitah), there is no question that every man with common sense should take care not to lend his money at the end of the sixth year, knowing full well that one who borrows at that time has already resolved not to repay it. And who is the philosopher or proponent of honor who would condemn a man for not lending at that time? Yet what does the Torah say? (Devarim 15:9-10) "Take care lest there be in your heart a base thought, saying: 'The seventh year is approaching, the year of remission,' and your eye be evil against your needy brother and you not give him… Give shall you give him, and let your heart not be narrow in giving him."

Chapter 20

And so beloved and great was compassion to the Giver of the Torah, blessed be He that immediately after the giving of the Torah, when He came to teach the people the judgments whereby they were to conduct themselves, with what did He open? (Shemoth 21:2) "When you acquire a Hebrew slave, etc." All know of the status of slaves in those times. They were the property of their owners, they and their children, like oxen or asses, and the master was permitted to beat or kill his slaves without fear (of reprisal). Yet the Torah in the beginning of (the pronouncement of) its judgments, called out liberty for the Hebrew slave, that he not labor for more than six years. And it was forbidden to kill even a Canaanite slave or to strike him cruelly. And it commanded that if his master beat him and he died under his hand, vengeance was to be taken. And if he maimed his eye or knocked his tooth out, he was to be set free. And it commanded, too, that his slave rest on Sabbaths and Festivals. The Torah was compassionate even to female captives of war, commanding that they be allowed a month of days to bewail at will their fathers and mothers; and it was forbidden to sell them after cohabiting with them.

Chapter 21

And not towards man alone did the Torah command compassion and kindness, but also towards beast and bird — on the one hand, for the sake of the animals themselves, "for His mercies are on all living things" (Tehillim 145:9), and on the other, for the benefit of man himself, so that he habituate himself to the trait of compassion and not adopt that of cruelty. Of this type are (Devarim 25:4) "Do not muzzle an ox in its threshing" and (Ibid. 22:10) "Do not plow with an ox and an ass together." For (as Ibn Ezra says) the strength of the ass is not equal to that of the ox. Similarly, (Vayikra 22:28) "And an ox or a lamb, it and its son you shall not slaughter on the same day." Similarly, the commandment that one's beasts rest on the Sabbath. And the Torah commanded us to respect the merciful one and to be compassionate to him — even to a beast or a bird. As we find in the mitzvah of sending away the mother bird (viz. Devarim 22:6-7). For the mother bird lying on its fledglings or eggs could easily have flown away and rescued itself upon seeing or hearing a man approaching. Why did it not do so? Out of compassion for its young. If a man were permitted to take her, it would be impressed upon him that compassion is rash and foolish, causing harm to those actuated by it. And, to the contrary, by its taking being forbidden to him, the glory of compassion will be deeply etched in his heart.

Chapter 22

And the Torah forbade acts of cruelty even vis-à-vis sacrifices, viz. (Vayikra 22:27) "An ox or a sheep or a goat, when it is born — seven days shall it be under its mother, and from the eighth day on, it shall be acceptable as an offering, a burnt-offering to the L-rd." Similarly, (Devarim 14:21) "You shall not cook a kid in its mother's milk," (according to Rashbam and Ibn Ezra) because doing so smacks of cruelty. And even though, since it is permitted to slaughter the goat, what difference does it make to it and its mother in which liquid they are cooked? In any event, this act engenders an evil streak in the soul of the doer and the seer. Imagine one's making of his father's bones, spoons; and of his skull, a dish, and eating from them. Though this causes no harm to his father, still, it bespeaks cruelty, and such an act diminishes compassion in him and in its beholders.

Chapter 23

And in order to exalt even more the virtue of compassion, the Torah attributes this trait to the Blessed one, saying (Shemoth 22:26) "for I am compassionate", (Ibid. 34:6) "The L-rd, the L-rd, a G-d merciful and kind", (Devarim 10:18) "He upholds the cause of orphans and the widow", and many others in the same vein.

Chapter 24

From this Torah guidance in compassion and mercy it developed throughout the generations that this trait became an "inheritance" to the children of Israel, so much so that even the peoples around them acknowledged (I Kings 20:31) "Behold, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings, etc." We, likewise, find that the practice of the early nations was to torture men to admit what they were suspected of, without witnesses and conclusive proof, as opposed to the instance of Israel, where such a practice obtained only during the reign of Herod, who was not of the seed of Israel, who despised all the ways of Israel and whose soul lusted only for the ways of the Romans.

Chapter 25

However, though the trait of compassion is a great and strong foundation for character improvement, its power does not suffice to always overcome a man's lusts and his wants. For a man is more compassionate towards himself than to others. And when he lacks something (whether that lack be real or imagined), it is felt far more intensely than the lack of his neighbor. And if it is possible to satisfy his want to the injury of his neighbor, compassion will not generate enough power to keep him from his evil design. Therefore, the Giver of the Torah saw fit to add a second foundation to character improvement — hope of reward and fear of punishment. For reward and punishment, in that they relate to the very self and fiber of a man, make a deep impression upon him, stronger sometimes than that made upon him by his lacks and lusts, with the result that he desists from satisfying them out of fear of punishment and hope of reward. And the reward and punishment which He established as the foundation for character improvement is not at the hands of man, who sees only (what is open) to the eyes, from which many things are concealed, but at the hands of G-d, who sees to the heart, from whom nothing is concealed. So that the second foundation of the Torah of Moses, the means of attaining both ends together — character improvement and perpetuation of the faith — is belief in providence and reward and punishment at the hands of G-d.

Chapter 26

The Torah does not command belief (in G-d). For Israel were already believers from the days of Abraham onwards. And if they were not believers, commanding them to believe would not help. But the Giver of the Torah added strength to belief in Providence through what He showed them in Egypt, smiting their oppressors with great plagues and rescuing sighing and groaning Israel from their hands and taking them out to eternal freedom. And Moses in all of his words to his people always bases his foundation on the providence of the L-rd to pay a man in accordance with his ways and the fruits of his deeds, this being the essence of the mitzvah of reminding our children of all that the L-rd wrought unto Pharaoh and his people. And He established the festival of matzoth and the sanctification of the first-born as a remembrance of the exodus from Egypt. And the reward and punishment in the Torah are designated both for the mitzvoth between a man and his neighbor and those between a man and the L-rd, wherefore this foundation is an effective means towards character improvement and observance of the faith as one.

Chapter 27

Included in the realm of providence and of reward and punishment revealed by the L-rd to His people at the exodus from Egypt was their borrowing vessels of silver and gold and garments, viz. (Shemoth 12:36) "and they emptied out Egypt," just as He had foretold in the beginning of His words to Moses (Ibid. 3:21-22) "And I will give this people favor in the eyes of the Egyptians; and it shall be, when you go out, you will not go out empty. And every woman will borrow of her neighbor and from the woman in whose house she dwells, etc." There are some who take exception to this, saying: Even if in truth the Jews deserved to receive from the Egyptians the wage for serving them all those years as an exchange for the houses and the wares that they left them in leaving (Egypt), still how could the L-rd command that they do such a thing? The Egyptians believed that the purpose of their leaving was only to sacrifice to their G-d and to return — wherefore they lent them. And, conversely, when Israel "borrowed" the vessels from them, they had already resolved not to return, so that their "borrowing" was outright guile and deceit. This command of the L-rd, then, (that they borrow) left a negative impress upon them, for they would thereby learn to speak deceitfully and to corrupt their ways. Could the L-rd not enrich His people without resorting to such stratagems?
This reservation is a formidable one to the mentalities of the men of <i>our</i> generation, but completely foreign to the mentalities of those who left Egypt. For those who suffered under the hands of Egypt and who were sentient of their evil deeds — when they were commanded to do this thing (i.e., too borrow), and when they fulfilled this command and borrowed from the Egyptians as Moses had taught them in the name of the L-rd, no negative impress was made upon their souls for the sanctioning of deceit and guile. But, to the contrary, the impress made was that the L-rd pays a man in accordance with his deeds and punishes the wicked who are cruel to their fellows. For they did not do this thing of their own will, and it is possible that in their eagerness to distance themselves from their oppressors and from the land of the devourers of their children, they would never be moved to do such a thing. They did so only because they were commanded to do so by their leader, who spoke to them in the name of the L-rd. What <i>did</i> impress itself upon their souls is that the L-rd hates men of wrong and saves the oppressed of spirit and pays them goodly reward. So that what <i>was</i> impressed upon their souls is that if they, too, in the time of their success would oppress others, the L-rd would take revenge for the oppressed ones and place the spoil of their oppressors in their hands, just as Moses exhorted them several times afterwards to remember that they had been slaves and the L-rd had redeemed them. Witness to all this is that in three places (Shemoth 3:21; 11:3; and 12:36) the Torah explains that it was <i>from the L-rd</i> to place the favor of the people in the eyes of Egypt so that they be moved to lend them. That is, the Jews recognized, and Moses their leader taught them, that the Egyptians, their oppressors, would never lend them their precious vessels if not by the will of the Almighty, miraculously. And for this reason it is written (Ibid. 12:31) "And the children of Israel did <i>according to the word of Moses</i>, etc." to teach that it was not from their hearts and from their own motivations that they did this, but to do the will of their leader in the name of the Almighty, their Savior by signs and wonders…

Chapter 28

And as with the borrowing of the vessels from the Egyptians, so is it with Israel's being commanded to cut off the men of Canaan. Even though it is not withheld from the Almighty to give His people an inheritance of field and vineyard without such violence and cruelty as cutting off nations which did them no harm, the Blessed One desired that they cut off those nations so that they take <i>mussar</i> ("chastisement") and see how the L-rd punishes doers of evil. As Moses said to them (Vayikra 18:27) "for all of these abominations were done by the people of the land which were before you", (Ibid. 25) "and the land vomited out its inhabitants", (Ibid. 26) "And you shall keep My statutes and My judgments, etc.", (Ibid. 28) "so that the land not vomit you out by your making it unclean, as it vomited out the nation that was before you." And it is for this reason that the Torah foretold in the L-rd's words to Abraham (Bereshith 15:16) "And the fourth generation (of the Egyptian exile) shall return here (to Canaan), for the sin of the Emori would not have been consummated, (justifying their being driven out of the land) until then." All this, to apprise us that those nations were cut off only because of their wickedness, Israel being powerless to take the land from their hands until their "measure" (of wickedness) had been consummated. And, likewise, from Moses' telling them (Devarim 9:9) "Do not say in your heart, when the L-rd your G-d thrusts them from before you: In my righteousness did the L-rd bring me to inherit this land, etc.", it is seen clearly that this was the inclination of their hearts, that the success of every nation was a result of the Blessed One's decree and providence, and not of chance as those who came after them assumed. And it follows from this that when they cut off the Canaanites, no negative impress was made on their souls which would run counter to improvement of character, but, rather, it was deeply impressed upon them that those nations were liable to destruction because of their abominations, and that <i>they</i> were only acting as the emissaries of the L-rd. And this belief was strengthened in their hearts by witnessing the signs and wonders wrought for them by the L-rd when they came to conquer the land, by crossing them over the Jordan on the dry land, by their warring against the men of Canaan as He pelted them with great stones from the heavens, and by His causing the sun to stand still in the midst of the heavens. And if the "wise ones" (those filled with compassion and kindness to the distant and the dead) would arise and say: "How could the L-rd command the destruction of an entire nation — men and women, young and old, sucklings and nurslings who did not sin?" you, in kind, "dull their teeth" and say to them: "And when the earth quakes and trembles, and houses fall on their dwellers, or if it come to pass in a land that half its inhabitants are cut off and perish, did the L-rd not command it?" It is not for me to defend the Almighty. It suffices for me if I have demonstrated clearly that what the L-rd commanded to Israel, both as regards the borrowing of the vessels from the Egyptians and the annihilating of the dwellers of Canaan did not leave in their hearts a negative impress which vitiated their character, but, to the contrary, strengthened their belief in providence and in reward and punishment.

Chapter 29

Comparable to this is the coupling of the commandment to cut off Amalek with the exhortation (Devarim 25:10) "You shall not forget." All this, to render despicable in the eyes of Israel the act of deceit, the act of Amalek. For he had no complaint against Israel, and Israel was not coming to wage war with him. But he sneaked up from behind them, when Israel was weak and fatigued, and without compassion or fear of G-d killed those who straggled behind. For this reason, after Moses exhorted them against deceit in weights and measures, concluding with (Ibid. 16) "For the abomination of the L-rd is … all who do wrong," he mentioned Amalek; for he, too, was guilty of wrong and deceit, Moses epitomizing Amalek's turpitude in (Ibid. 18) "who met you upon the way and cut off all who straggled behind you when you were weak and weary and (he) did not fear G-d." And He set Amalek up as a sign and an omen for "the sons of deceit," commanding to cut him off without forgetting or relenting. From this they (Israel) would learn how despicable to the L-rd was every man of perfidy and how sore his punishment at the hands of the L-rd. And, beyond a doubt, this commandment, too, did not leave any negative impress on the heart of Israel, but, to the contrary, availed to distance them from repugnant acts when they saw how much the Almighty despised them and punished their perpetrators.

Chapter 30

Now it is true that in these times the extermination of an entire nation, men and women, nursling and suckling, is an act of cruelty to make the ears of all hearers ring — in spite of which, even in these days if there would arise a prophet whom all men believed to be a messenger of god and that prophet would command the people of a certain nation to rise up against the people of another city notorious for their wicked deeds and destroy them, women and children, there is no question in my mind that their hearts would not become corrupt because of this act that they performed at the behest of the prophet, but from that day on they would greatly fear that god and take great care not to rouse his wrath against them. How much more so in those days, when the destruction of peoples was a commonplace in wars, and they would lay open pregnant women and crush their infants upon a rock, the command to cut off the Canaanites and Amalek would not sound as unthinkable as it does in our days. Do we not find that when Saul and the people were "compassionate" in the war with Amalek, to whom were they compassionate? To the old people, or to the women, or to the pregnant women, or to the sucklings? Not so. They were "compassionate" only to Agag (the king) himself and to the choicest of the flock and the herd. Is this, in truth, compassion? They let the king live only to gain glory thereby and they kept the choicest of the herd and the flock alive only so that they could eat their flesh. And it was for this reason that the L-rd was wroth with Saul. For He knew that it was not out of compassion that he defied His word, but only to indulge himself and his people and for the glory of his name.

Chapter 31

The retribution mentioned in the Torah is collective and individual — to the people in general and to each Israelite in particular. To the people in general — for open transgressions; and to each individual — for those committed in secret. For the will of the Giver of the Torah was to make all of Israel responsible for one another, this being a potent means of impeding the spread of subversion and corruption in the people. For, G-dly retribution being to the people collectively, it follows that if one sees his neighbor corrupting his ways, he will not say "What business is it of mine?", but he will reprove him. And if he continues sinning, he will testify against him in <i>beth-din</i>, which will punish him. "And all the people will hear and fear." Therefore, the blessings and curses (in the Torah) are to the nation in general. And it is only concerning those sins which are normally committed in secret and concerning the non-performance (in secret) of positive commandments (as per Rashbam, Ibn Ezra, and Ra'avan [Even Ha'ezer 45]) that it was said "Cursed is the <i>man</i>." And the L-rd desired that when they come to the land, the Levites proclaim to all the people the blessings and the curses, ("And it shall be if you will hear" — Devarim 28:1; "And it shall be if you will not hear" — Ibid. 15), in order to impress upon them that they are all responsible for one another. For reward and punishment are for the people collectively. But before the blessings and the curses (vis-à-vis the people collectively), the L-rd desired that the Levites proclaim "Cursed is <i>the man</i> who sins in secret" (viz. Devarim 27:15). And this, for two reasons: The first, that the sinner in secret not say in his heart: "Since the majority of the people are upright, if I sin what of it? Shall one man sin and He be wroth with the entire congregation?" And second, that the people not despair and say: "We are lost; all of us are lost. For perhaps one or many will sin in secret and His wrath will be against the entire nation." But they will know and remember that (Devarim 29:28) "the hidden things are for the L-rd our G-d to punish" and "the revealed ones for us and our children" to punish the sinners. So that the proclamation of "Cursed is the man who sins in secret" is a blessing for the people in general, that it will not be punished for the secret sins (of the others). And this is the intent in <i>Joshua</i> 8:33-34 "… as Moses the servant of Israel had commanded to bless the people first. And after that he read all the words of the Torah, the blessing and the curse." (Thus there appears to me the depth of the plain meaning of these verses.)

Chapter 32

And this, too, is the rationale for the mitzvah of <i>eglah arufah</i> (the heifer of the broken neck, Devarim 21:1-9) — <i>not</i> to uncover the murderer (as per Maimonides, Moreh III, Chapter 40), but for two reasons: 1) to strengthen this principle that all of Israel are responsible for each other and that "the land will not be atoned for the blood that has been spilled in it except by the blood of its spiller" (viz. Bamidbar 35:33) — wherefore, since the slayer is not known to them and they cannot bring him to justice, the heifer is broken instead of him and the elders wash their hands (over the heifer) as a sign that they and their senders are innocent and their palms were not sullied by the blood of the slain one, and 2) (in the strength of their conviction in the punishment adverting to the land for the blood spilt in it —) that they not come to kill an innocent man suspected of that murder without incontestable proof and clear testimony. For though they knew that all of the people were not responsible for one who slew his neighbor in secret, they might think that this was so only when the slain one was not known (i.e., when he has not been found), but in our instance, where the corpse <i>has</i> been found, they might think that all the congregation <i>would</i> be punished unless they exerted themselves to find the killer.

Chapter 33

The third foundation for the Torah of Moses — a means towards character improvement and perpetuation of the religion itself — is the belief that Israel is the people selected by the L-rd to be His "chosen people," to which end He made a covenant with their forefathers never to be broken. This belief requires explanation. Not, G-d-forbid, to remove it from its true meaning by devious rationalizations, but in order to understand it in its true meaning and to remove from the hearts of men the confusion and obfuscation that will indue it if they judge of this belief by what they find in respect to the early nations. For, in truth, this is the root of all the errors that the "sophisticates" fall prey to when they judge of the affairs of the children of Israel, judging them either by the thought patterns of the later generations or by those of the other early generations. And this is a great error. For the early children of Israel (those cleaving to the Torah of G-d) — their ways and thoughts were very far from both the earlier and the later generations.

Chapter 34

Some of the early nations served a special god which their neighbors did not serve, wherefore they believed that that god watched over them and loved them and was far from their neighbors and hated them for serving another. Not such was "the portion of Jacob," (but they believed that) the Creator of all was their G-d, the G-d of all flesh, His mercies upon all of His creations. Though Israel was His "first-born son," all of the nations are His sons. And He was never wroth with the other peoples for serving another. And the prophets never proclaimed that a certain nation would be punished for serving wood and stone, but only for its violence, for the abominations that it practiced, and for its absence of mercy.

Chapter 35

Others among the early peoples despised and hated all nations besides them for not having attained to their level in wisdom and art, and they called them "barbarians" and regarded them as beasts. But the children of Israel and their fathers never hated or despised other peoples. Abraham was covenanted with Aner, Eshkol, and Mamre, the Amorites, and he and his son Isaac entered a covenant with Avimelech, king of the Philistines. Jacob cursed the ferocity of the wrath of his two sons for killing the men of Shechem who had violated their sister. Judah entered into partnership with Chira the Adulamite. Joseph said (Bereshith 39:9) "How can I do this great evil (adultery) and sin against G-d," even though his master was an Egyptian. And Joshua and the chiefs (of the tribes) kept their oath to the Giveonites even though they were Canaanites and even though their oath was taken in error. And Ezekiel says that Tzidkiyahu will fall by the hand of the king of Bavel (Nevuchadnezzar) for having rebelled against him after having made a covenant with him and having sworn allegiance to him. And even though Nevuchadnezzar was an idolator and a tyrant, the prophet does not justify Tzidkiyahu's rebellion, but cries out (without naming names) that one who breaks his covenant will not succeed or escape, viz. (Ezekiel 17:15) "Shall the doer of these succeed or escape? Shall the breaker of a covenant escape!"

Chapter 36

The belief of Israel relative to the difference between them and the other peoples is that the Hebrew sees all men as the sons of one Father, all of them created in the image of G-d, and no man being judged for his belief but for his deeds. But he does believe that since all of the nations were idol worshippers and Abraham cleaved to one G-d, the Possessor of heaven and earth, the L-rd made a covenant with him to increase his seed and to be a G-d to them (i.e., to make manifest to them his G-dhood through signs and wonders) and to give them the land of Canaan. And as a sign of this covenant He commanded circumcision for himself and his seed. And when the L-rd came to give them Torah through Moses, He confirmed and strengthened this belief in them, saying (Shemoth 19:5) "If you heed My voice and you keep My covenant, you will be treasured by Me above all other peoples, for mine is the whole earth (and all men are dear to Me), and <i>you</i> shall be until Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation." And to this end, to impress upon them this belief, He increased for them Torah and mitzvoth, so that <i>all</i> the members of Israel be as priests relative to the other nations, i.e., separate from the multitude by reason of the mitzvoth and statutes unique to them to sanctify them to their G-d.

Chapter 37

Now the increase of mitzvoth and statutes in the Torah of Moses are of avail for observance of the faith, for thereby the Israelites were separated from the idolatrous nations, and it was also of avail for improvement of character, this, in two respects: the first, the mitzvoth of G-d that one observes remind him at all times of the G-d who commanded them. And the remembrance of G-d and of His providence and of reward and punishment act as a rein upon the lusts' strengthening themselves in a man and implant in his heart the fear of G-d that he not sin. And second, there is no stratagem for a man's overcoming his evil inclination and ruling over his spirit other than that of training himself to separate himself from pleasures and to bear distress and stress, as epitomized in (Eichah 3:27) "It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth." And the philosopher Epictetus said: "If a man takes to heart these two words, he is certain not to sin and he will live in peace all of his days — 'Sustain' and 'Abstain.'" That is, sustain stress and abstain from pleasure. The increase of mitzvoth and statutes trains a man to rule over his spirit and to sustain and abstain.

Chapter 38

However, with all of the Torah's strengthening this belief, Israel's being a treasured people, and with all of its distancing them from mingling with the idolatrous nations, the Torah never distinguished between a Hebrew and a gentile in all that the laws of righteousness and justness require of a man in relation to his neighbor. The Torah did not say "Do not kill the people of your nation," "Do not commit adultery with a Hebrew woman," "Do not steal from a Hebrew." And it distinguished between a Hebrew and a gentile only in four special laws which are not required by the attribute of justice and which do not obtain among the other nations, even the most upright among them, and which are "innovations" for Israel in particular, so that they relate to each other not according to the attribute of justice alone, but above and beyond the attribute of justice, as befits brothers. And these are: 
1) to lend our money without <i>any</i> interest, not much and not little. And it is well known that the attribute of justice does not demand this and that limited interest is permitted among all nations.  
2) not to reclaim a loan after the <i>shemitah</i> year (the year of "release"), this, too, being a statue above and beyond the statute of justice, which does not obtain with other nations.  
3) to set slaves free at the end of six years and to designate a maid-servant for himself or for his son or to exert himself to redeem her, this, too, being above and beyond the attribute of justice and not obtaining in other nations.  
4) not to take revenge or to bear a grudge, there being nothing more above the attribute of justice and constituting saintliness than this. For, in truth, of what is the Torah speaking here? If of injuring another in his body or in his possessions, the Torah has already forbidden this and indicated its punishment. It must be speaking, then, of one's saying to his neighbor "I will not lend <i>you</i> just as you did not lend <i>me</i>." To abstain even from this is above and beyond the attribute of justice.

Chapter 39

But in all the other laws of righteousness between a man and his neighbor the Torah did not distinguish between an Israelite and a gentile, but stated the commandment unqualified, viz.: "You shall not kill," "You shall not commit adultery," "You shall not steal." Or it used the words "neighbor," as in "You shall not testify falsely against your neighbor," the word "neighbor" not connoting people of one nation in particular, but all people, as witness (Shemoth 11:2) "And let every man ask of his neighbor and each woman of her neighbor," the Egyptians being referred to as "neighbors" of Israel. But the words "your brother," which apply literally to the members of a specific people are not used for mitzvoth of the attribute of justice. As to (Vayikra 25:14) "You shall not wrong, one man <i>his brother</i>," this does not imply that it <i>is</i> permitted to wrong a gentile. There the Torah employs the words "his brother," for the context is the selling of land, and a gentile had no land in Eretz Yisrael. Likewise, it is not to be derived from "your brother" re the returning of a lost object and the raising of a fallen beast (Devarim 22:1-4) that it is permitted (to take) the lost object of a gentile. For Scripture does not state "If you see the ox of your brother or his lamb straying, you shall not take them for yourself," but "You shall not see the ox of your brother … and ignore them … but you shall gather it into your house, etc." Now this commandment not to ignore the lost object and to gather it into your house is above and beyond the attribute of justice, as is that of occupying ourselves with the raising of a beast fallen on the road. Similarly, (Vayikra 19:17) "You shall not hate your brother in your heart" is above and beyond the attribute of justice. For the verse speaks not of vain hatred, but of hatred of an evildoer and a sinner as is indicated by the end of the verse, "Reprove shall you reprove your neighbor."

Chapter 40

In sum, then, what is common to all of the mitzvoth and the statutes given by the L-rd to His people is improvement of character and prospering of the nation and the good of its people <i>or</i> perpetuation of the faith in the midst of the people, or both of these as one.

Chapter 41

Now all of the mitzvoth are divided into two broad categories — mitzvoth between man and the L-rd and mitzvoth between man and his neighbor. The reason for all of the latter, as explained, is to promote national and individual welfare through improvement of character and through each conducting himself with his fellow with righteousness, justice, lovingkindness, and mercy and the sinner's bearing his punishment and all the people's hearing and fearing. As to the mitzvoth between man and the L-rd — most of them are geared to perpetuation of the faith, so that they remember G-d, and His fear be upon their faces and they not forget Him, (this being the general intent of every religion in the world), and, in addition to this, so that the entire nation be in the status of priests relative to the other peoples, separated and sanctified by unique statutes so that their hearts are exalted and their souls uplifted in their faith in being a chosen people, a kingdom of priests and a holy nation, and that they not intermingle with other, idolatrous people and not emulate their deeds but cleave all of their days to their G-d and His just and holy ways. And, aside from this, these mitzvoth are of great avail towards improvement of character, whether in general — in the two respects mentioned above (#37) — or in particular, as will be explained.

Chapter 42

All the forbidden foods are forbidden by reason of holiness; that is, to separate Israel (from the peoples) and to sanctify them like Cohanim. And they are not (forbidden) for health reasons. For there are many other things which the Torah could have forbidden if its intent were to teach the people to guard their health, aside from the fact (for instance) that the Torah forbade the eating of the camel, and it is known that the Ishmaelites eat its flesh, which is nourishing to them and not at all harmful. Therefore, even though it is possible that some of the forbidden foods are forbidden for some <i>specific</i> reason, we need not seek a (specific) reason for all of them. For what difference does it make to us whether it is forbidden for this or that (specific) reason if the <i>general</i> intent is that some foods be forbidden to us ("by reason of holiness")?

Chapter 43

The rationale for the bans on cohabitation is not, as Maimonides would have it, to minimize intercourse (viz. Moreh 3:49); for the Torah did not forbid many wives (except to the king alone), nor much intercourse with one wife, but all are for the benefit of society. The rationale for the prohibition of adultery is self-evident — to prevent the violence, the contention, and the murders that would result therefrom. And even if a man would acquiesce in this and permit his wife to a man of wealth, it is forbidden because of the corruption that would affect the people as a whole. The rationale for the prohibition of relations between man and beast: they run counter to nature, and if they were permitted, marriage with women would diminish. Illicit relations between kin: they are forbidden for the good of the family, amelioration of character, and the welfare of society. For living with one's mother, his father's wife, his father's sister, or the wife of his father's brother runs counter to honoring his father and mother, which, in turn, causes corruption of character and family disorganization. Similarly, one's son's wife is analogous to one's daughter to her in-laws, so that if her father-in-law lives with her, this will demean the honor of both in-laws and the father and the son. Similarly, taking a woman and her daughter creates equality between them and demeans the honor of the mother. The (rationale for) the prohibition of living with a woman and her sister is implicit in the word "<i>litzror</i>" ("to be rivals," viz. Vayikra 18:18) "And a woman together with her sister you shall not take, to be rivals"), that is, to breed envy and hatred between them, when it is their <i>nature</i> to <i>love</i> each other. And it is well known that hatred among lovers is deeper than hatred among strangers, for as deep as the former love is the hatred that follows in its wake — the result: corruption of character and great dislocation of the family unit. Similarly, living with one's brother's wife leads to envy and hatred between the brothers. And even after his brother's death, if he left over children and his brother takes his wife in levirate marriage (yibum), this will foment hatred between himself and his brother's children, as it will between his children and his brother's children, and it, too, will result in corruption of character and dislocation of the family unit. (Not so, if his brother dies without leaving children (viz. [Devarim 25:5]). And it would seem that (the rationale for) the prohibition of the sister of one's father or of one's mother is the well-being of the nation. For if his sister were permitted, most men would marry their sisters and every family would be like a nation unto itself, and families would not intermarry and intermingle, so that the people would not be like one nation but like many nations, not close to each other and not loving one another.

Chapter 44

<i>Tumah</i> (ritual uncleanliness) is divided into two types: <i>tumah</i> whose cleansing involves the bringing of an offering and <i>tumah</i> whose cleansing does not involve the bringing of an offering. We shall begin with the <i>tumah</i> of leprosy (tzara'ath), the most severe of the <i>tumoth</i> of the first type. Many have conjectured that the distancing of the leper is due to his being contagious. Now aside from the fact that this is not agreed upon by the doctors, it seems to me that if the Torah was concerned about contagion, there are other contagious diseases for which the Torah prescribed no remedy. Why, (for example) did the Torah not legislate for pestilence? It would seem to me (in seeking the rationale for the Torah's enactment regarding leprosy) that change in appearance of the skin was regarded by the ancients as a sign of G-d's rebuke and that the leper in their minds was being afflicted by G-d as punishment for a severe sin that he was guilty of, wherefore they separated from him as from a man anathematized by G-d. Similarly, a change in the appearance of a garment or a house was to them a sign of G-d's rebuke, as if the afflicted garment or house were hated by G-d by reason of some severe sin that had been done in them. And since all this abetted the belief in providence and reward and punishment by G-d, the Torah sustained this belief and commanded the distancing of the leper, the burning of the garment, and the razing of the house where the plague-spot was found, and the sprinkling and the cleansing of the house. And it likewise commanded that one healed of leprosy bring a sacrifice, so that as soon as there departed from him G-d's rebuke and anathematization which distanced him from appearing before Him, he come to the house of the L-rd and humble himself before Him and thank Him for having again drawn him close to Him and beseech Him not to rebuke him again and distance him from Him. This is the rationale of (Vayikra 14:18) "And the Cohein shall atone (for the one to be cleansed) before the L-rd." For through the offering G-d is reconciled with him and reposes His lovingkindness upon him. And it would seem that the two birds, the cedar wood, the hyssop, the crimson, and the sprinklings are all a sign and intimation of atonement of the sin, to make it known that the leper is no longer anathematized by the L-rd. The crimson intimates transgression, transgressions being symbolized by redness, as in (Isaiah 1:18) "If your sins be as crimson, etc.", symbolizing the spilling of blood, the worst of the transgressions. Cedar and hyssop intimate great and small, respectively, as in (I Kings 5:13) "from the cedar that is in Levanon until the hyssop that emerges from the wall" — so that cedar and hyssop and crimson intimate grave and lesser transgressions respectively. The blood of the slaughtered bird signifies great cleansing, i.e., cleansing from a great sin, for man atones by (the blood of) life. And the living waters signify lesser cleansing, i.e., cleansing from a lesser sin. The two birds are the atonement for the leper and his "exchange." One is slaughtered and its blood atones for his life. The other lives and is connected with his transgressions (cedar wood, hyssop, and crimson) and it is dipped in blood and in water, which is sprinkled upon the leper, intimating that his transgressions have been atoned and he has returned to his state of cleanliness. Afterwards, the living bird is sent over the face of the field, this signifying that the leper is no longer quarantined outside the camp, but has emerged from his sequestration and may go wherever he wills.

Chapter 45

Bordering upon the instance of the leper are those of the menstruant, the man or woman with a flux and a woman after childbirth, all of these being (in a sense) anathematized by the L-rd. For the (unwilling) emission of blood or seed is the "beginning" of death, intimating that that man or woman are subject to death. And for this reason we have been commanded to separate from them and to take care not to touch them. And for this reason, too, when they are clean (of their condition) they bring an offering and the Cohein atones for them as he does for a leper. The <i>niddah</i> (a menstruant), however, was not obligated to bring an offering, the Torah being solicitous of the daughters of Israel and not requiring them to exert themselves to travel from their place and come to the house of the L-rd every month. And it is not to be contended that her not being required to bring an offering is due to the improbability of her imploring the L-rd that she not revert to her <i>niddah</i> state, for there <i>is</i> a probability of her imploring that, when she does revert to it, her <i>tumah</i> not extend so long as to render her a <i>zavah</i> (a woman with a "flux" [viz. Vayikra 15:25]). Along the same lines, a woman after childbirth required an offering, not in order to implore that she not beget again, but to implore that in her (next) birth she not die. For blood issuing from a woman in childbirth is a sign of death, of which all women in childbirth are in danger.

Chapter 46

Those <i>tumoth</i> cleansing from which does not entail the bringing of an offering are dead-body <i>tumah</i>, carrion <i>tumah</i>, and semen <i>tumah</i> in the absence of sickness. These do not entail atonement, for they do not descend from Heaven but are contingent upon the will of man. If he wishes, he becomes <i>tamei</i>; if he does not wish it, he does not become <i>tamei</i> (But the Torah does not legislate separately for exceptional cases, for which reason there is no special enactment in this regard for one on whom someone has died suddenly and the like [viz. Bamidbar 6:9-11]), so that the aforementioned <i>tema'im</i> (unclean ones) cannot be perceived as "anathematized <i>by the L-rd</i>." But the dead body and carrion <i>convey</i> <i>tumah</i>. For death is G-d's rebuke, than which there is nothing more severe. And if the leper and the <i>zav</i> convey <i>tumah</i> to those who touch them, being anathematized by the L-rd, how much more so a dead body! And because of the gravity of dead-body <i>tumah</i>, the toucher, too, was anathematized for seven days and required sprinkling with the waters of purification. But a slaughtered beast is not <i>tamei</i>, for its death was not at the hands of Heaven and by way of rebuke, but by man and for the benefit of man. A slain man, however, even though he is slain by man, is <i>tamei</i>. For a man is more subject to providence and reward and punishment than a beast. Therefore, if a man dies, even at the hands of man, still, his death is perceived as decreed by G-d and by His rebuke. The same is not to be said for a beast slaughtered (for consumption) or killed. The rationale for the <i>tumah</i> of semen is respect for the Temple and its holy objects. That a man not come to the house of the L-rd and eat holy flesh on the day when he indulged in (non-essential) bodily pleasure (as opposed to eating and drinking) along the lines of the command preceding the giving of the Torah, (Shemoth 19:15) "Be ready in three days. Do not draw near to a woman." This prohibition exalts and uplifts in the mind of the entire congregation the honor due the sanctuary and its holy objects, as it does in the minds of the Cohanim the service which they perform, all of this being of great avail in magnifying the fear of G-d in the hearts of the Cohanim and the people. The sprinkling of the purifying waters symbolized the removal of sin; the red heifer, in its redness, symbolized transgression; and thus, the cedar wood, the hyssop, and the crimson symbolized transgression, greater and lesser; their being burnt together, the nullification of transgression, as did the ashes — wherefore its sprinkling purified one from dead-body <i>tumah</i>, the gravest of all. But although the transgression was burned, it was not entirely nullified, for the remaining ashes retained some of it, wherefore they imparted lesser-degree <i>tumah</i> to the toucher — which was removed through ritual immersion. And it is not to be wondered how the red heifer cleansed the <i>tamei</i> and rendered <i>tamei</i> the clean, removing grave <i>tumah</i> and imparting lesser <i>tumah</i>. An analogy: A copper vessel (to be ritually cleansed) must first be scoured with sand, which removes what rinsing in water did not suffice to remove, after which it must again be rinsed in water to remove the sand stuck to it, as it is written (Vayikra 6:21) "It shall be scoured and rinsed in water." The scourer, too, must rinse his hands because of the impurity cleaving to them. In the same way, the ashes of the red heifer effect strong "scouring" and remove the graver <i>tumah</i>, after which (ritual) immersion is required for those occupying themselves with the waters of purification as well as for the waters sprinkled upon him.

Chapter 47

The sacrifices originated not in commandment, but in will, men voluntarily giving thanks to G-d for His lovingkindness with them or offering Him a gift to appease His wrath and to conciliate Him so that He grant their requests. For a man cannot conduct himself with his G-d other than he does with a king of flesh and blood. And when they came to offer a gift to G-d they could find no other way to do so than by burning it with fire. For by doing so, they took it out of their domain and out of the domain of other men and out of the domain of beasts, animals, and birds. Also, as it was burning and its smoke ascended on high, it seemed to them as if it were ascending to G-d. And something burned in G-d's honor they called "<i>kadosh</i>" ("holy"), lit., "<i>yekod esh</i>" ("burnt with fire"), and afterwards this term was extended to other things.
It is not the aim of the Torah to teach the people wisdom and knowledge, but to guide them in the path of righteousness. It did not abolish the custom of offerings, not because it was powerless to do so, but because that custom is not evil in itself and is not harmful to men or to the enhancement of their character, but it is of avail to them. For if the Torah apprised the people that the L-rd does not desire burnt-offerings for sacrifices, they would say "Why does the L-rd desire that we be righteous and what profit if we mend our ways?" and since one of the foundations of the Torah is that G-d is providential with men and loves doers of good and hates evildoers it was essential that G-d not be perceived in the quintessence of exaltation, in His true eminence, but that His eminence be "lowered" somewhat, as it were, so that He be perceived by men as a great king who is attuned to all of their deeds, who hears their outcries, and who receives their gifts. And this necessity existed not only for that generation; but it exists equally for all generations. And, if in place of sacrifices G-d would command prayer and song, reading of the Torah and listening to words of <i>mussar</i> (chastisement), and He would not command the offering of sacrifices, the majesty of G-d and His fear would not be impressed upon the multitude. For it would seem to them that the gods of the nations, whose servants <i>did</i> sacrifice before them were greater and more to be honored than our G-d, whose service is only with words alone. For this is the way of the multitude in all generations. And not only the way of the multitude alone, but that of most individuals. Whom do they honor? One who honors and aggrandizes himself. One who is self-effacing and does not seek grandeur for himself is of no consequence to them.
As to the G-d of truth, even though He has no need of the honor of flesh and blood, it is to our benefit and good to bring His fear into our heart that we not sin. And since in those days this was not possible without sacrifices, He commanded that they be brought. The "fruit" of the sacrifices offered by the congregation in the Temple was this: It was impressed upon the heart of the multitude that a great G-d and king dwelt in their midst, that they were beloved by Him and that He commanded them to perform the (sacrificial) service desired by Him, and that by performing this service as commanded they are reconciled to Him each day and perpetually draw His love down upon themselves.

Chapter 48

The Torah commanded that not everyone build a <i>bamah</i> (a sacrificial mound) for himself, but that the entire congregation sacrifice their offerings in a distinct place designated by the L-rd. This was not, G-d forbid, to limit the number of sacrifices, but for the good and prosperity of the people, amelioration of character, and perpetuation of the faith. For if the entire people had one (central) sanctuary, they would all gather together in one place, their hearts would be bound in brotherhood, they would always be unified, and each tribe and family would not be a people unto themselves. But if everyone built a <i>bamah</i> for himself, it would suffice him that G-d be well disposed to <i>him</i> and receive <i>his</i> offerings, and he would not be concerned at all for the rest of his nation — when the will of the Torah was that reward be collective and that all of Israel be mutually responsible. It is also possible (if everyone had his own bamah) that the sacrificial service would be undermined by a family or a tribe and they would alter its provisions. And little by little they would adopt the statutes of the nations and customs that are detestable to the Blessed One, to the point of sacrificing their own sons and daughters. But with the service centralized in one place, such undermining would be less likely for the consent of the entire nation would be required (for any innovations).

Chapter 49

The (rationale for the) communal offerings: so that there be for Israel a tabernacle and a sanctuary for the service of G-d so that it be impressed upon them that the L-rd is in their midst and that He is their king and their leader who oversees their deeds and who recompenses them for their ways and their acts. And this would not be impressed upon the hearts of the multitude without a tangible emblem of this, wherefore it was necessary that the Temple resemble a king's palace, that there be in it a table and a menorah, that there be on the table a display of bread and the vessels appertaining to the table, its dishes and its spoons. And since it was customary to present to G-d a gift of edibles, it was fitting to bring before our King things that betokened eating and drinking: the sacrifices, for eating, and the libations, for drinking. And it was necessary that the king have palace servants who pay attendance upon him — the Cohanim: one of them beholding the face of the king, sitting first in the kingdom — the high-priest. And it was necessary that the sanctuary and its vessels and the Cohanim and their vestments be resplendent and majestic to impress upon the populace the grandeur of the King dwelling in the Temple and so that His fear be "upon their faces" that they not sin. And though in the beginning, when everyone built a <i>bamah</i> for himself the service was relegated to any man or to the first-born, now that the sacrifices were offered in only one place it was necessary that the service be relegated to one family who served in the name of the entire people. And it was fitting that this family devoted to the service of G-d be freed of other labors and services. And since its service was in the house of G-d in the name of all the people, it was fitting that its sustenance be provided by the people. However, since it would <i>not</i> be fitting that <i>every</i> Cohein and Levite receive a fixed stipend, the <i>tzaddik</i> and the evildoer alike, the Torah left it to the discretion of each Israelite to give his gifts to any Cohein and Levite that he desired. And, as a result, the Cohanim and the Levites would exert themselves to find favor in the eyes of the congregation by the fitness of their ways and the justness of their acts.

Chapter 50

This belief, that the L-rd is in our midst, the Torah was prescient to etch even into the hearts of soldiers going to war outside their land, viz. (Devarim 23:10-15) "When you go out as an encampment against your enemies, then you shall guard yourself against every evil thing … For the L-rd your G-d walks in the midst of your camp, etc." All this (viz. Maimonides, Moreh 3:41) to strengthen in the hearts of the soldiers the belief that the Shechinah reposes among them, so that they not give themselves free rein and cast aside Torah and <i>mussar</i> (and act) in the manner of most soldiers in those days.

Chapter 51

The individual offerings are all for the benefit of the individual for all of the times that befall him. If good, let him give thanks to the L-rd and offer his sacrifice. By doing so, it will be impressed upon him that this good came from the L-rd and he will trust in Him and improve his deeds in order to draw upon himself always His love and His mercy. If he is in distress, let him pray to G-d and vow that if He rescues him he will sacrifice an offering to Him, and when he <i>is</i> rescued, let him pay his vow and impress upon himself that the L-rd has rescued him. And if he sins unwittingly let him bring an offering and impress upon himself that his G-d has forgiven him and that he has been reconciled to him as in the beginning. If there were no atonement for unwitting sins, the sinner would say in his heart: Who will save me from this stern G-d! I have sinned unwittingly, but He will be wroth with me and cast me away from Him with no hope of my assuaging His wrath. If so, why should I keep myself from sinning from this day on? But the willful sinner does not bring an offering so that it not be impressed upon him, as it was upon the early nations, that G-d takes graft from sinners and forgives their offenses. There are only three transgressions, where one might stumble into thinking that there is no transgression in his act, where the Torah commanded him to bring an offering:
1) (Vayikra 5:1) "if he hears the voice of an oath (i.e., if he were besworn to give testimony if he knows it), and he were a witness, having seen or known and he does not tell." For one who hears his neighbor beswear him to testify for him if he has testimony on his behalf rationalizes, saying: Who can require me to get involved in a dispute that is not mine and to testify for him? And why should I cause injury to his disputant?
2) (Ibid. 5:21-22) "if he denies to his neighbor a pledge, or a deposit, or a theft, or if he oppressed his neighbor (i.e., if he held back the wages of a hired laborer), or if he finds a lost object and denies it and swears falsely." The (purpose of) the offering is not to atone for what he has stolen, (for he must return the theft), but it is for his swearing falsely, (and as far as that is concerned,) the sinner rationalizes: If I swore falsely, I did so only for the money, and now that I have returned the money to its owner, I am not guilty of transgression.
3)(Ibid. 19:20) "if he lies … with a maid-servant betrothed to a man, and she has not been redeemed (with money), or freedom has not been given to her" (by writ). This master uses his maid-servant as <i>such</i> and also for cohabitation. This is not the Blessed One's will. It is, rather, that he free her and take her to wife as a free woman. And if he does not free her, she is "<i>bikoreth</i>" (Ibid.), i.e., <i>hefker</i> (not "bound" to another, [see Ramban]), both vis-à-vis the master and vis-à-vis another. So that if one lies with her, he is not considered an adulterer since she has not been freed, only a free woman being considered married (as we find with respect to a yefath toar [a woman taken captive in war, Devarim 21:14: "You may not sell her since you have taken her to wife.") Now this woman, in one respect, is her master's, he having bought her and obligated himself to feed her, so that it is not fitting that she make herself <i>hefker</i> to others or that others treat her as <i>hefker</i>. Therefore, one who lies with her is a sinner. But, in another respect she <i>is</i> <i>hefker</i>, for the Torah punishes the master, that she not be to him as a married woman so long as he has not freed her. Therefore, if one sins with her, he <i>does</i> have some extenuation and (in this respect) an offering atones. The guilt-offerings of abuse (of sacred objects), of the Nazirite, of the leper, and the suspended guilt-offering are not relevant in this connection, for they are all brought for unwittingness or for a sin unknown to the sinner. For in respect to abuse it is written explicitly (Vayikra 5:15) "If a man commit a trespass and sin <i>unwittingly</i> in the holy things of the L-rd, etc." The Nazirite brings his offering to atone for a previous sin, <i>unknown</i> to him, wherefore he is, as it were, anathematized by G-d, who, not accepting his Naziritism, causes someone to suddenly die upon him and render him <i>tamei</i> (viz. Bamidbar 6:9). The leper, too, is anathematized by G-d (viz. #45), <i>not knowing</i> why. And, in respect to the suspended guilt-offering, it is written explicitly (Ibid. 18) "And the Cohein shall atone for him for his <i>unwitting</i> sin wherein he erred."

Chapter 52

There was yet another benefit in the individual offerings, namely, aside from the portion adverting to the Cohanim, also what was left to the owners had to be eaten in company with others. For they were not permitted to leave anything over of it until the morrow or against the third day. Nor was it permitted to salt the flesh of the sacrifice and to bring it to their houses outside of Jerusalem and eat it with their families. And one who paid his vow to the L-rd for His lovingkindess to him was obliged to include others also in his rejoicing, so that he was bound in ties of affection with people he had never known, or, at least benefited the poor and needy from his repast. Therefore, immediately after (Vayikra 19:5-8) "And when you sacrifice a sacrifice of peace-offerings to the L-rd … On the day of your sacrifice shall it be eaten and on the morrow … And if it be eaten on the third day … its eater shall bear his sin" — immediately after there follows another mitzvah which seems to be entirely unrelated to what precedes, viz. (Ibid. 9-10) "And when you reap the harvest of your land, you shall not end off the corner of your field … to the poor man and to the stranger shall you leave them." This, because the mitzvah of eating the sacrifice for one or two days is similar to that of leaving <i>peah</i> (the corner) in the field, the intent of both being charity and lovingkindness.

Chapter 53

The mitzvah of Shabbath lends itself to distinction between the resting of the Israelite and the resting of slave and beast, the latter being an end in itself, compassion and graciousness towards them, while the former is not an end in itself, for a free man can rest whenever he wishes to do so, so that (for the free man) it is a means to other ends. First of all, the mitzvah of (resting on) Shabbath, like all the restraints of holiness, exalts the Israelites to perceive themselves as a kingdom of priests and a holy nation, resting on the day that G-d rested from the labors (of creating) heaven and earth. In this respect, Shabbath is a sign between the L-rd and Israel; that is, a sign of the covenant between us. And, in another respect, there is in the mitzvah of (resting on) Shabbath a great benefit vis-à-vis character enhancement, national well-being and perpetuation of the faith. Every man rests sometimes from his labors and enjoys his rest. But if everyone rested on the day he chose, no benefit would accrue from these private restings aside from the enjoyment of each individual. But if the entire nation rests on the same day, they can gather together to eat and drink and to converse with each other, increasing love among them. They can also hear Torah and <i>tochachah</i> ("chastisement") from the elders and the sages. And the Sabbath day "equalizes" rich and poor, master and slave. "Small and great are (alike) there, and the slave is free of his master" (Iyyov 3:19). This serves to distance pride from the rich and to remind them that we are all children of one Father.

Chapter 54

The mitzvah of the three festivals is also along these lines. It is just that the aforementioned benefit is more generalized on the festivals than on the Sabbaths. For on the Sabbath the gathering and the closeness (of the people) is only between those of one city whereas on the festivals all the men of the nation are involved. This is a great force for the unification of the people, that all of them be friends as one man, and for the perpetuation of the faith among them, as explained above (#48) in reference to the Temple that there be only one (place of sacrifice). The times chosen for these festivals are the harvest time (Shavuoth) and the time of the ingathering (of the harvest, Succoth), when the land owners rejoice and with happiness and gladness of heart they celebrate the festival of the L-rd and thank Him for His abundant lovingkindness. The festival of matzoth (Pesach) is in remembrance of the exodus from Egypt. The (intent of) the day of <i>teruah</i> (the blowing of the shofar, Rosh Hashanah) would seem to be to publicize the beginning of the year, for which reason the shofar is blown on it as it is blown on the Jubilee year (Yovel) to publicize freedom, <i>that</i> blowing being on the tenth of the month in order to distinguish between the Jubilee year and the other years, and the tenth day was singled out to be the first festival after Rosh Hashanah. The mitzvah of Yom Kippur is to strengthen the belief in the goodness of the L-rd and His lovingkindness and to strengthen thereby our love for Him and our trust in Him. The mitzvah of matzah was added on Pesach as a reminder of the haste in which the king of Egypt drove them from his land, when until that time he had held them against their will, that haste being a great sign of "the finger of G-d" which humbled the hard heart (of Pharaoh). And on the festival of the ingathering, the mitzvah of <i>succah</i> was added so that they remember that this good land whereof they eat came to them only in the lovingkindness of the L-rd, our ancestors dwelling in <i>succoth</i>, having no homes (how much less so, fields). The four species (of Succoth) are a sign of the eminence of the land, which grows big trees, (with fruit) good to the sight, the taste, and the smell, and which does not lack water (a reference to the brook-willows). In taking those species the people rejoiced in the eminence of their land and thanked G-d for giving it to them.

Chapter 55

The mitzvah of the sabbatical year (shemitah) is similar to that of Shabbath. For just as the mitzvah of Shabbath is to strengthen in the heart of the people their belief in being a holy nation, so the mitzvah of <i>shemitah</i> impresses upon them that their land, too, is holy in that it "rests" on the seventh year just as G-d rested on the seventh day. And just as in the desert the L-rd gave them on the sixth day bread for two days, so, when they were on their land, He commanded for them His blessing for the sixth year, that its produce suffice also for the <i>shemitah</i> year. And the belief in the holiness of the land was a strong incentive to distance the people from defiling and desecrating it by abominations. Also, perforce, when the land would rest, the slaves and the beasts would also rest somewhat from their labors, this corresponding to their resting on the Sabbath. And, the produce of <i>shemitah</i> being ownerless (hefker), the <i>shemitah</i> year compassionated the poor, equalized rich and poor, and lowered the pride of the rich man, reminding him that all men are equal. And the <i>shemitah</i> (remission) of monetary debts as well (on that year) constitutes compassion and kindness to the poor.

Chapter 56

And just as the people, aside from their resting on the seventh day, were given several festivals on which to rest and to rejoice in the name of the L-rd, so the holy land, aside from the year of <i>shemitah</i>, was given the year of <i>Yovel</i> (the fiftieth year). The <i>Yovel</i> equates the rich man with the poor man as <i>shemitah</i> does, is like the Sabbath in respect to (not) working the earth, and (is like shemitah) in respect to its produce being ownerless (hefker). In addition (it contains the elements of) the return of lands to their (original) owners and the emancipation of slaves — great compassion for the poor and great strengthening of (the principle of) equality for all the people of the country.

Chapter 57

The (mitzvoth of) giving to the Cohein the first-born son, <i>terumah</i>, first-fruits, and the first of the shearing further the perpetuation of the faith, that a man remember constantly that all comes from G-d, who is to be thanked on the day of his rejoicing and given the first of what He granted him. For his giving to the Cohanim, the ministers of G-d, is equivalent to his giving to G-d himself. And these gifts being given to the Cohanim instead of being burnt results in another benefit, supplying the needs of the Cohanim themselves. And to supply the needs of the Levites, likewise, we have been commanded to give the tithe (ma'aser). And the Levites, so that they, too, keep in mind the L-rd their G-d, have been commanded to give to the Cohanim <i>ma'aser</i> from the <i>ma'aser</i> (which they receive from the Israelites.) But the Cohanim themselves, in the eminence of their holiness, did not need to separate (part of) their <i>terumah</i> to G-d, but they were only commanded to eat it in (a state of) purity, this sufficing to keep them in mind of their sanctity.

Chapter 58

And there is yet another kind of separation (involving) what was eaten by the owners, but only in Jerusalem, as was the case with fruits of the fourth year and second-tithe. Eating in the place where the L-rd had chosen to repose His name resulted in many benefits: Residing in the holy city and in the place of the Divine service impresses one with G-d's exaltedness and His fear, this being the intent of (Devarim 14:23) "… so that you learn to fear the L-rd your G-d all of the days." Also, the gathering of the people in one city to eat and rejoice was a great force for national unity and a great incentive for individuals to recognize and love one another and to love their people. The fruits of the fourth year were "holy for praise to the L-rd" (Vayikra 9:24). This was the rationale for their being commanded to wait for the fourth year (to eat them), so that they be choice and ripe. Until that year the fruit was <i>arlah</i> ("rejected") and forbidden, analogous to the ban on bread, <i>kali</i>, and <i>karmel</i> before the bringing of the <i>omer</i> (viz. Vayikra 23:14).

Chapter 59

And in order to impress upon the people their being holy and a chosen people, the Torah states (Devarim 14:1-2) "Children are you to the L-rd your G-d. Do not lacerate yourselves and do not make baldness between your eyes (i.e., adjoining the forehead) for the dead. For you are a holy people to the L-rd your G-d", (Vayikra 19:27-28) "You shall not round off the corners of your head, and a cutting for a (dead) person you shall not make in your flesh." Now aside from the injury and the pain to the body resulting from these actions they render a person prone to short-temperedness and wrongdoing and distance him from the trait of patience which invests us with life and peace and rescues us from all sin. And it again commanded the Cohanim specifically against this, (viz. (Ibid. 21:5-6) "They shall not make a baldness upon their heads, and the corner of their beards they shall not shave off (with a razor), and in their flesh they shall not make any cutting. Holy shall they be to their G-d." And it added for them that they were not to render themselves unclean (tamei) for their (dead) kin, adding for the high-priest that he is not to render himself <i>tamei</i> even for his father or his mother. All this, so that the holiness of the Cohanim be especially impressed upon them and upon all of the people. Now see and understand that the Torah greatly loved the trait of compassion and kindness which produces <i>fruit</i>, which leads one man to help and benefit another; and it does not love that compassion which has no fruit ("pri"), but only "flowers" ("p'rachim"), the kind which moves a man to cry profusely over the dead one and to lacerate himself and make himself bald over him. For this is not a positive trait at all, but a deficiency of intellect and of belief in the L-rd. The will of the Torah was that all of the people be strong in their belief in the L-rd, and the Cohanim more than all the people, and the high-priest more than all the Cohanim.

Chapter 60

For the perpetuation of the faith and to distance Israel from being faithless to the G-d of truth, the Torah had to exhort not only against idolatry per se but even against "a diviner of divinations," "a <i>me'onein</i>" (one who assigns an auspicious "time" ['onah'] for a particular undertaking), "a necromancer" (one who interprets natural happenings as signs and portents), "a sorcerer," "a <i>chover chaver</i>" (one who "congregates" snakes or scorpions for magical purposes), "a <i>shoel ov</i>" (one who raises the spirit of the dead), "a <i>yidoni</i>" (one who extracts speech from a bone), and one who inquires of the dead (e.g., via a skull) [viz. <i>Devarim</i> 18:10-11]. For all of these bring a man to place his trust in someone other than the Blessed One, and one who deals in these things or trusts in them is akin to an idolator. And for this reason all kinds of <i>kilayim</i> ("admixtures") were forbidden, viz. (Vayikra 19:19) "You shall not mate your beast with <i>a diverse kind</i>" (kilayim), "your field you shall not sow with <i>diverse seeds</i>" (kilayim), "and a mingled (kilayim, [interwoven]) garment, <i>sha'atnez</i>, shall not come upon you." For the idolators would ascribe a charm and a benefit to the intermingling of diverse species, believing that in this way there would be unified in one bond the diverse gods appointed over each of these species respectively. All of these constitute denial of the Oneness of G-d and are deserving of distancing by the Torah.

Chapter 61

To conclude: The mitzvoth of <i>mezuzah</i>, <i>tzitzith</i>, and <i>tefillin</i> assure the perpetuation of the faith, that G-d and His Torah be before us always. As stated in the Torah (Shemoth 13:9) "And it (the account of the exodus from Egypt) shall be to you as a sign upon your hand (in the hand phylactery) and as a memorial between your eyes (in the head phylactery), so that the Torah of the L-rd be in your mouth."