Ramban on Leviticus
רמב"ן על ויקרא
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Ramban_on_Leviticus
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org
-VBM Torah
-http://vbm-torah.org/archive/chavero/28chavero.htm

Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Verse 1



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Verse 1



Verse 2


...One should be separate from sexual transgressions and all other transgressions, for any place that one find a fence or mention of sexual transgressions, one also finds a mention of the word "kadosh" or holiness. This is the language of Rashi. But in Sefer Vayikra, there is only a phrase of "You should be separate". And they learned there (Chapter 12:3), That the people should be holy because Hashem is holy and the people should be separate as Hashem is separate. According to my opinion, the separation is not from sins of sexual transgression, like the rabbi (Rashi) says. Rather, the separation should occur in any place that we are separate. The issue comes when the Torah warns of sexual transgressions and forbidden foods, the Torah also allows sexual relations between husband and wife and allows eating of meats and wines. Therefore, a desirous person will take advantage and have multiple wives or will be a savage when it comes to drinking wine and eating meat. He will do as he pleases because there is no prohibition in the Torah. However, he will be a scoundrel in the permissions of the Torah. Therefore, the torah comes to mention specifically after the prohibitions, the general rule or law that we should be separate from the permissible areas of the Torah. 

Verse 3



Verse 4



Verse 5



Verse 6



Verse 7



Verse 8



Verse 9



Verse 10



Verse 11



Verse 12



Verse 13



Verse 14



Verse 15



Verse 16



Verse 17



Verse 18

The phrase “Love your neighbor as yourself” cannot be meant literally, since man cannot be expected to love his neighbor as himself.  Moreover, Rabbi Akiva has ruled that “Your life comes first.”   The Torah here enjoins us that we should wish upon our neighbor the same benefits that we wish upon ourselves.  Perhaps, this is the reason for the dative instead of the accusative form of the verb phrase; we find the same in “And you shall love him as yourself” (19:34).  Indeed, sometimes a person may wish upon his neighbor certain benefits, but only wealth, not wisdom and the like.  But even if he wishes his cherished friend well in everything, i.e. wealth, honor, learning, and wisdom, he will not do so unstintingly; he will still insist on a larger share of the benefits.  It is this shortcoming that the Torah condemned.  Rather, a man should wish his fellow well in everything, just as he does in his own case, and he should place no limitations on his love. Therefore, in the case of Yonatan and David (I Shemuel 20:17), it says that Yonatan “loved him as his own soul,” since he had removed all jealousy from his heart, declaring “And you shall rule over Israel” (ibid. 23:17).