Peninei Halakhah, Kashrut
פניני הלכה, כשרות
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Peninei Halakhah, Kashrut

Introduction







Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Section 1



Section 2



Section 3



Section 4



Section 5


Despite the fact that it was permitted to humans to eat meat, one should be very careful with the desire that is connected to the eating of meat, which tends to make a person go after brutishness and sin. And so we find that the desire to eat meat caused Israel to sin, as it is written (Numbers 11:4) "Now the riffraff among them craved a craving and moreover the Children of Israel wept again and said: Who will give us meat to eat?" And Moshe our teacher complained to Hashem: "From where should I [get] meat to give to this entire people, when they weep on me, saying: Give us meat so that we may eat! I am not able, I alone, to carry this entire people, for it is too heavy for me!" (Numbers 11:13-14). And so Moshe was commanded to answer Israel that their punishment was going to come in the fulfillment of their request: "for a monthful of days, until it comes out of your nostrils and becomes for you something-disgusting because you have spurned Hashem who is among you, by weeping before him, saying: Why, now, did we leave Egypt?" (Numbers 11:20) " and a rush-of-wind moved from Hashem and swept in quails from the sea... the people arose all that day and all night, and all the morrow day and gathered the quail; the least gathered ten homers [a large measure, some say a homer is 30 gallons] and they slaughtered all around the camp. The meat was still between their teeth, not yet completely chewed, when the anger of Hashem  flared up among the people, and Hashem struck down among the people an exceedingly great striking. So they called the name of that place: Kivrot Ha-Taava/ Burial-Places of the Craving, for there they buried the people who had-the-craving"(Numbers 11:31-34). From this we learned for the generations how severe and dangerous the exaggerated desire to eat meat is, that it extinguished the light of the soul and kills the body.

Chapter 15



Chapter 16



Chapter 17



Chapter 18



Chapter 19



Chapter 20



Chapter 21



Chapter 22



Section 1


Together with the permission of eating meat that is not offered in the Temple there is the prohibition of eating blood, as it is written (Deut. 12:20-23) ... that is to say, blood has a specific mission, which is to support the soul of the living animal, and therefore even though the Torah permitted us to eat meat, it did not permit us to eat blood.