Halakhah and Aggadah
הלכה ואגדה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Halakhah and Aggadah

For the halakha -- a frown; for the aggada -- a smile. The one is strict, harsh, unyielding as iron -- the quality of justice. The other is permissive, softer than oil -- the quality of mercy. The one gives orders without exception -- her allowance is an allowance and her proscription is a proscription; the other gives advice relevant to each's strength and knowledge; allowance and proscription and moderation are hers. The one -- the shell, the body, the act; the other -- the interior, the soul, the intent. Here is cemented orthodoxy, obligation, indenture; there is continual renewal, freedom, permission. Until here -- I spoke of halakha and aggada in life; and in literature there are more: Here is the dryness of prose, a formal and permanent style, the language of gray monochrome -- the sovereignty of the mind; and there is the lushness of poetry, a current and ever-changing style, the language of rainbow polka-dots -- the sovereignty of the heart.
On these opposite appellations, which contrast halakha and aggada, I could add more infinitely, and it is obvious that in each there would be a bit of truth, but is there nothing to learn from this -- the popular position -- that the halakha and the aggada are two enemies, one thing and its reverse?
Those who say this are confusing fundamental nature with outside appearance -- to whom are these similar? To the one who decides that the river's ice and water are two distinct materials. The halakha and the aggada are not in fact anything except two halves of the same whole, two faces of the same creature. The connection between the two of them is like that from speech to thought and feeling, or from action and tangible form to speech. The halakha is the crystallization, the final and inevitable result of the aggada; the aggada is the core of the halakha. 

Halakhah, however, is no less a work of art than aggadah. Its art is the greatest in the world – the art of life and the paths of life. Its material is the living person with all the impulses of his heart. Its methods are personal, communal, and national education. And its fruits are a continuum of days of proper deeds and lives, the paving of a way of life through the twists and turns of the individual and the group, a proper way for a person in the world, and a refined path in life. The creations of halakha’s hands are not like the creations of the hands of other arts, such as sculpture, drawing, architecture, song, and poetry, which are concentrated and unified in matter, space, and time. Rather, they join together little by little, point by point, from all of the flow of a man’s life and deeds that, in the end, give over one final product, one form, whether complete or damaged. Halakhah is the guiding art and the teaching art of an entire nation. So all of its developments upon the national soul, great and small, are cut from the holy spirit, with supernal wisdom that sees the end from the beginning (alluding to Isaiah 46:10). Day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute, it is focused on casting only one form – the essence of the creatures, the divine image in man. [Likewise,] the Cathedral of Cologne, the Cathedral of Milan, and Notre Dame in Paris were perfected in their beauty and became what they became by the efforts of world-class artists for hundreds of years, each one of whom, in his time, gave his life and the best of his creative powers exclusively to this holy work. And there is no doubt that it was only from all of their subjugation to one central idea, which they felt to be very lofty, that their “heavenly work” succeeded to such a degree. This idea – to build a house of God – was what hovered in front of all their eyes; akin to, like the vision that is being shown you (alluding to Exodus 25:40). And He had the holy spirit descend upon them. So that was what moved the ruler, the plane, the chisel, and the brush in their hands and called out into their ears for every point and chisel, and every small brick and large brick that, after hundreds of years of the work of people divided by time and place, joined together into one lofty and beautiful building.
The children-of-Israel has its own magnificent creation—a lofty, holy day, “Queen Shabbat”. In the imagination of the nation, it has developed into a living being with a body and the figure of a body, all radiance and beauty. She is the Shabbat that God brought into God’s world at the close of the act of creation, “so that the painted and polished marriage canopy would not lack a bride”. It was she who was God’s dear treasure in God’s storehouse, for whom God found no other partner than Israel. According to a different folk legend, she sits like a princess, “like a bride set among her maidens,” concealed in a sanctuary in the Garden of Eden within seven chambers, and her six maids, the six days of creation, attend to her. When she enters the city—all turn their faces toward the door and receive her appearance with a blessing: “<i>Bo’i calah, boi calah</i>–Come, O bride! Come, O bride!—The Queen, Shabbat!” and the pious go out to receive her in the field. Once, she also came in a dream to Ibn Ezra, and she was in low-spirited and sad, and she sent a letter by his hand to her partner Israel—that is the famous “Sabbath Epistle.” All the poets of Israel, from Rabbi Yehuda HaLevi to Heine, sang her their songs and melodies. Is she not a creature all of <i>aggadah</i>–of legend, of tale? Is she not herself a source of life and sanctity to an entire nation, and a wellspring flowing with divine inspiration for poets and liturgists? <br>And even so, who will say, who will ascertain, by whose hand she was crafted, and who made her into what she is: by the hand of <i>halakhah</i>—law, or by the hand of <i>aggadah</i>–legend? Tractate Shabbat has one hundred fifty-seven double pages, and Tractate Eruvin has one hundred five, and they are almost entirely devoid of <i>aggadah</i>. They mostly comprise examinations and precise legal analyses into the thirty-nine labors and their subcategories and the fixing of domains; with what does one light, with what does an animal go out, how does one communalize a domain—how exhausting to the spirit! How much acuity wasted on every little serif! And when I traverse among those pages and see groups upon groups of sages and scholars at their work, I say: Indeed, artists of life I see before me! Artists of life in the workshop and at the potter’s wheel! Tremendous spiritual work like this, at the same time like an ant and like a giant, work for its own sake and born of love and faith without bounds, is impossible without divine inspiration. Each of those individuals did their part according to their character and their soul’s inclinations, and all of them together were beholden to an exalted will that ruled over them. This is nothing but a single, lofty ideal, a single, elevated image of Shabbat floating before the eyes of these exceptional people, and her spirit is what gathered them here from all the generations and made them into collaborators in her creation and enhancement. Every “<i>matkif</i>–he challenged”, every “<i>urminhu</i>–they brought a counter-source”, every barrier and every fence—is nothing but a new illuminative ornament, an additional embellishment in the same shape, necessary ornaments and embellishments, because without them, she won’t become what she needs to be. And what is the fruit of all this laborious work of <i>halakhah</i>–of law? A day that is all <i>aggadah</i>–all legend.












"We may only teach in the Hebrew language, this is the view of the sages. Ploni (i.e., so-and-so) states: [We may teach] in Hebrew and in [Aramaic] translation, and in any language. Almoni (i.e., a different so-and-so) states: Jewish topics [must be taught] in Hebrew, topics not of a Jewish nature [may be taught] in any language. Rabbi Palmoni (yet another so-and-so) states: We may only teach in the Jewish language" - and the future interpreter [of the text] will interpret: "In the Jewish language, meaning Yiddish, as it was spoken by Jews in the time of Rabbi Palmoni. And obviously, this is not the original Jewish language of the Jews from the Biblical age, which is Hebrew. For if it was so, what would be the difference between the view of Rabbi Palmoni and the first opinion [of the sages]?"