Rambam on Mishnah Zevachim
רמב"ם על משנה זבחים
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Rambam_on_Mishnah_Zevachim
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Rambam on Mishnah Zevachim



Chapter 1



Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4



Chapter 5



Chapter 6



Chapter 7



Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10



Chapter 11



Chapter 12



Chapter 13



Chapter 14



Mishnah 1



Mishnah 2



Mishnah 3



Mishnah 4



Mishnah 5



Mishnah 6



Mishnah 7

<b>The altars in Nov and Giv'on were permitted, and they were designated as holy of holies, etc.</b>
After the destruction of the Tabernacle in Shiloh due to the sins of our ancestors, they established the Tent of Meeting, which was made in the desert. Afterward, when Nov was destroyed, they established it in Giv'on, and it stood in Giv'on and Nov for twenty-seven years. During this time, offering sacrifices on altars was permitted because Shiloh was considered the resting place, as hinted by the verse, "And Jerusalem is the inheritance." As explained, the prohibition of altars was stated, "For you have not yet come to the resting place and the inheritance." The intention of the verse was not to say that once they reach the resting place, the altars would be forbidden forever. Rather, the meaning is that once they reached the resting place, all altars would be prohibited. Similarly, when they reached the inheritance, they were also prohibited. The proof is that they were permitted both between the resting place and the inheritance. This is what the verse meant by differentiating and giving permission for each. During the time when the Sanctuary was in Shiloh and later in Jerusalem, the Divine Presence resided in Nov and Giv'on. The Second Tithe is not mentioned because it is consumed in the same place as regular holy offerings. Since they were permitted to offer sacrifices during that time, they were also allowed to eat them in all places. This is what is meant by "permitted to eat regular holy offerings in all the cities of Israel." This cannot be said about the holiest of holy offerings because it is stated concerning them, "You shall eat it in a holy place, in the courtyard of the Tent of Meeting." In times when it was not permissible to eat regular holy offerings in all places, the tithes required being brought to a specific location, as stated, "You shall not eat within your gates the tithe of your grain," etc. It is not mentioned during the time of the round of cities in all the cities of Israel because the Israelites did not yet have possession of their cities but were occupied with conquering them.

Mishnah 8

When they came to Jerusalem, the altars were forbidden, and they no longer had permission to offer sacrifices. 
Jerusalem is called an inheritance for bringing its sanctity and establishing it forever. Regarding Jerusalem, the prophet said, "His inheritance shall not be forsaken" (Joel 3:20). At first, it is mentioned that God chose Jerusalem for His divine presence and chose Israel as His treasured nation. Afterwards, it is stated that God will watch over this people whom He has chosen in that place, as it is also said, "For the Lord has chosen Zion" (Psalms 132:13), "For the Lord has chosen Jacob" (Psalms 135:4). "For the Lord will not forsake His people" (1 Samuel 12:22). The greatness of Jerusalem is further explained, and it is said, "This is My resting place forever" (Psalms 132:14). The reference to "within the curtains" and "within the walls of the sanctuary" is explained as I have clarified on numerous occasions.