Maaseh Nissim on Pesach Haggadah
מעשה ניסים על הגדה של פסח
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Maaseh Nissim on Pesach Haggadah

Kadesh



Urchatz



Karpas



Yachatz



Magid

Ha Lachma Anya



Paragraph 1



Paragraph 2



Paragraph 3

To explain this paragraph, we need to introduce the difficulties which the commentaries have expanded upon, which include: (1) why is it written in Aramaic? (2) Why is the decree encumbent on all those who are hungry let them come and eat, which is specifically meant for the poor on Pesach, and not during the other festivals, where it states "Vesamachta b'Chagecha"? (3) This announcement is fitting to be said outside for those who sleep in the street, so that they should hear and come to the house, not for those who are already inside the house after the door is already closed.  It would make more sense to make this announcement before Kiddush is recited so that the poor person should be able to fulfil both Kiddush and Karpas! (4) Why is it called the bread of poverty? (5) The statement "that our forefathers ate in the land of Egypt is untrue because they did not eat Matza in Egypt until they left as the verse testifies "they carried the dough in bundles on their shoulders". (6)  Why does it repeat "now we are here" with "now we are slaves". (7)  Why is this paragraph not said when the temple was still standing?
In order to answer these difficulties, we need to provide the following introduction.  It is fitting for a servant which has come from prison to thank and bless the one who took him out in his kindness.  The nature of man also obligates him to be happy when he remembers the moment that he was freed, how much more so the day that he is emancipated.  However, it is not the way of a person who has already left prison once and is then imprisoned again in an even worse prison than the first one to dance and be joyful in his second prison because he was released once before.  He is completely enveloped in prison - of what help was his first emancipation?
It is also known that when a person has great joy, it is his way to invite many beloved friends to make a joyous party, and the greater his joy, the more he desires to share it with his friends to enjoy that moment with him.  We see testimony to this in the feast of Achashveirosh (who invited all the people in 127 provinces to feast with him)
It is known that the commentators explain that also while the Jews ate Matzah in Egypt, because the Egyptians wouldn't let the Jew's dough rise, because of the pressure of their work.  This is the explanation of the Abarbanel as to why it is called the bread of affliction.
After all these introductions, we can explain this paragraph, for it was established after the second temple's destruction.  The reason is that a person's heart should not be amazed at the making of a feast on leaving Egypt, yet we are still servants of Achashveirosh, and are still entrenched in this bitter exile.  This is not what a person does (as explained above).  We therefore say כהא לחמא עניא די אכלו אבהתנא בארעא דמצרים.  This meal that we are eating is likened to the meal which our forefathers ate in Egypt (because the word bread signifies a meal, as is described in the book of Samuel).  It is therefore fitting to not be happy - after all we are in a worst exile than the first.  We are eating this meal with a bitter heart, as our forefathers ate it in Egypt - with sadness, and poverty, lacking the basics of life.  This is in contrast to the moment when the temple stood (which is why we did not say it then)

Four Questions



We Were Slaves in Egypt



Story of the Five Rabbis



The Four Sons



Yechol Me'rosh Chodesh



In the Beginning Our Fathers Were Idol Worshipers



First Fruits Declaration



The Ten Plagues



Dayenu



Rabban Gamliel's Three Things



First Half of Hallel



Second Cup of Wine



Rachtzah



Motzi Matzah



Maror



Korech



Shulchan Orech



Tzafun



Barech

Birkat Hamazon



Third Cup of Wine



Pour Out Thy Wrath



Hallel

Second Half of Hallel



Songs of Praise and Thanks



Fourth Cup of Wine



Nirtzah

Chasal Siddur Pesach



L'Shana HaBaa



And It Happened at Midnight



Zevach Pesach



Ki Lo Na'e



Adir Hu



Sefirat HaOmer



Echad Mi Yodea



Chad Gadya



Paragraph 1



Paragraph 2



Paragraph 3



Paragraph 4



Paragraph 5



Paragraph 6



Paragraph 7



Paragraph 8



Paragraph 9

The angel of death came: The messiah of Joseph will be killed by the angel of death.