Mishneh Torah, Tefillin, Mezuzah and the Torah Scroll
משנה תורה, הלכות תפילין ומזוזה וספר תורה
Sefaria Community Translation
https://www.sefaria.org

Mishneh Torah, Tefillin, Mezuzah and the Torah Scroll



Chapter 1

The four section from the Torah are: "Sanctify to me..."; "When you bring...", which are in the book of Shemot; and "Listen..." and "When you listen..." They are written separately, and we cover them with leather, and they are called tefillin. We place them on the head and tie it on the arm, even if one crown of one letter of the four section are not properly written, the Torah says that they are prevented from being fit, until they are written completely as they have been established...
And so too the sections that are in the mezuzah are: "shma" and "v'hayah im shamoah". Even if one letter is missing from the two sections, if there is even one calligraphical ornament removed from the Torah until they are written completely, and so too with a Torah scroll that is missing one letter is invalid.Tefillin have ten details that are all halachah according to Moses from Sinai, and all of them prevents tefillin from being it, therefore if one changes one of them those are unfit tefillin. Two of these are with regards to their writing, and eight of them are regarding the covering and the tying of the straps. These are the two regarding their writing: They must be written in ink, and they must be written on parchment
















Tefillin and Mezuzot cannot be written except for in Assyrian script. And for Torah scrolls, they allowed it to be written also in Greek, but this Greek language has already disappeared from the world and been lost, so today all three may only be written in Assyrian script. And he must be careful in their writing that two letters not stick together, for any letter that is not surrounded by parchment on all four sides is disqualified. And any letter that a child who is not wise, nor a fool, cannot read is disqualified. Therefore, he must be careful with forming the letters that a yud not look like a vav, nor a vav a yud, nor a kaf a bet, nor a bet a kaf, nor a dalet a reish, nor a reish a dalet, and the like, until the reader will not have trouble.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4






...One who said the blessing "to lay on Tefillin" and tied on the Tefillin of the hand, it is forbidden for him to talk, and even to return greetings to his teacher, until he places on that of the head. And if he spoke, this is a sin, and he must say a second blessing, "concerning the precept of Tefillin," and the he places on that of the head.

--

Chapter 5

How is the Mezuzah written? One writes two paragraphs, Shema and Vehaya Im Shamoah on one page, on one sheet, and with space below it and above, equal to the width of half a fingernail. And if he wrote it on two or three pages it is Kosher, so long as he did not shape the text like a tail [wide at the top and narrow at the bottom -- triangular] or circular, or like a tent [triangle wide at the bottom and narrow at the top], and if he did it one of those ways it is invalid. If he wrote it in the wrong order, such as a section before a section [that should precede it] it is invalid. If he wrote it on two skins even if he stitched them together it is invalid. A Mezuzah may not be written on a worn out Torah Scroll or on worn out tefillin because one does not go down from a grave holiness to a mild holiness.


The simple practice is that we write on the *mezuza* on the outside, opposite the space between one paragraph and another, "*Shaddai*." And there is no loss from this, since it is on the outside. However, those who write on the inside the names of the angels, holy names, a verse, or signatures, these are among those who have no portion in the world to come. For these simpletons, it is not enough for them that they invalidated the commandment, but they treated a great commadment - the unifications of the name of the Holy One, blessed be He, with His love, and His service - as if it is an amulet for their own benefit, as it arose on their hearts the foolish idea that this is something that will provide benefit with respect to the vanities of the world.

When we fold it, we roll it from the end of the line to its beginning such that when the reader opens to read, he will read from the beginning of the line to its end. And after one rolls it, one places it in a tube of reed or of wood or anything and attaches it to the doorpost of the entrance with a nail or digs into the doorpost of the entrance and inserts the mezuzah [scroll] into it.
And before one affixes it onto the doorpost of the entrance, one first blesses, "Praised are You Lord our God King of the Universe who makes us holy with His commandments and command us to affix a mezuzah". And one does not bless at the time of writing it since its affixing, that is the commandment.


Everybody is obligated in the Mitzvah of Mezuzah, even women and slaves. We educate minors to perform the Mitzvah of Mezuzah for their houses. One who rents a house outside the Land, and one who dwells in an inn in the Land of Israel, is exempt from putting up a Mezuzah for 30 days. But one who rents a house in the Land of Israel is obligated to put up a Mezuzah immediately.

Chapter 6

There are ten conditions on a house, and after [meeting] such, the occupant of it is obligated to do a mezuzah for himself. And if it lacks one condition out of them, one is exempt from the commandment. And these are them: that it will be an area of four cubits by four cubits or more; that it will have two doorposts; and it will have a lintel; and it will have a roof; and it will have doors; and the entrance will have a height of ten handbreadths or more; and that house will be for ordinary [i.e. non-sacred] use; and it will be made for the occupancy of a human; and made for the occupancy of [something] respectful; and made for fixed occupancy. 







A toilet, a bath house, a mikveh, and a tannery and those like them, are exempt from a mezuzah because they are not used as a dignified dwelling.  A sukkah on Sukkot and a house on a boat are exempt from having a mezuzah because they are not used as fixed dwellings.  Two booths of potters, one inside the other, the outer one is exempt from the mezuzah because it is not fixed.  Stores in the market are exempt because they are not fixed as dwellings.
A house which has many entrances, despite that it is unusual to go out and come in other than through one of them, one is obligated to make a mezuzah on every single entrance. A small entrance between a house and an upper room - one is obligated in [affixing] a mezuzah. A room which is in the house, even a room within a room, one is obligated to make a mezuzah on the entrance of the inner room and the entrance of the outer and on the entrance of the house since all of them  are made for occupancy and permanent.


People must be very careful about the mitzvah of mezuzah because it is an obligation on everyone at all times, so that any time they go out or come in, they will brush against the unity of the name of the Holy Blessed One and remember God's love and wake up from their sleep and errors in the futilities of daily life and know that there is nothing that lasts forever except the knowledge of the Rock of Ages. And they will then immediately return to their true knowledge and and walk on the right path. The sages said: anyone who has tefillin on their head and arm, and tzitzit on their clothing, and a mezuzah on their doorpost is safe from sin, for they have so many reminders, and they are the angels that save people from sin, as it is written, "The angel of the LORD camps around those who fear God and rescues them." (Ps 34:7)

Chapter 7

It is a positive commandment on every Jewish man to write a Torah scroll for himself as it says "Write for yourself this song", that is to say 'Write for yourself a Torah which has in it this song', because one does not write the Torah only in segments.  Even if one's ancestors left him a Torah scroll, it is a mitzvah to write one for himself.  If he wrote it by his own hand, it is as if he received it from Mount Sinai, and if he doesn't know  how to write, others can write it for him.  One who corrects a Torah scroll, even a single letter, it is as if he wrote all of it.
It is a positive commandment for the king to write an additional Torah scroll for himself as king, besides the one he had as a normal person, as it says, "When he is sitting upon his throne, he shall write..."  He corrects it based on the scroll from the Temple Courtyard, according to the Sanhedrin.  The one he wrote as a normal person he should place in storage, and the one he wrote or which was written for him as king should be with him always.  If he goes off to war, the scroll should go with him.  When he comes in, when he sits in judgement, the scroll is with him, as it says "and it will be with him and he shall read it all the days of his life". 
If he had no Torah scroll before he became king, he needs to write two after he begins to rule.  One he places in his storehouse, and the second he keeps with him always, and it should never be away from him except at night, when he goes to the bath house, the bathroom, or to sleep in his bed.  
A Torah scroll written without engraved lines, or written partially on whole skins and partially on parchment is unfit.  Either it should be entirely whole skins or entirely parchment.  How does one write a Torah scroll?  He writes an exceedingly correct and pleasant writing.  Between each word he leaves a space like a small letter, and between each letter a space like a hair, and between each line a space like a line.  Each line should be [at least] 30 letters long so one could write "l'mishpchoteichem" [which has 10 letters in Hebrew]3 times, and this is the width of each column.  No line should be narrower than than this, lest it appear like a letter, and no line should be longer lest the reader lose his place.    ...

Chapter 8



Chapter 9



Chapter 10








Toda persona que esté impura, incluso mujeres en período de menstruación (nidá), e incluso alguien no judío, tienen permitido tocar, agarrar, hasta leer de un Sefer Tora. Esto es así porque Palabras de Tora No Reciben Impureza ("Ein Divrei Tora Mekablim Tuma). Todo esto no aplica con las manos sucias y con barro, cuento para tocar la Tora se debe estar limpio