Mishneh Torah, Ritual Slaughter
משנה תורה, הלכות שחיטה
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah,_Ritual_Slaughter
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org
-Copy for Education
-(Maimonides Mishnah Torah: Hilkhot Shechita—A New Translation With Commentary and Notes; Rabbi Eliyahu Tougher, p.506)

Chapter 1

It is a positive commandment for one who desires to partake of the meat of a domesticated animal, wild beast, or fowl to slaughter (it) and then partake of it  as (Deuteronomy 12:21) states: “And you shall slaughter from your cattle and from your sheep.” And with regard to a firstborn animal with a blemish (ibid: 22) states: “As one would partake of a deer and a gazelle.” From this we learn that a wild beast is (governed by) the same (laws) as a domesticated animal with regard to ritual slaughter. And with regard to a fowl (Leviticus 17:13) states: “that will snare a beast or a fowl as prey…and shed its blood.” This teaches that shedding the blood of a fowl is analogous to shedding the blood of a wild beast.


























And when can one slaughter? At any time, whether day or night - that is if he has a torch with him, so that he can see what he is doing. And if he slaughtered in darkness, his slaughter is valid.

Chapter 2



Chapter 3



Chapter 4

1. When a Jew who doesn't know the 5 matters that disqualify shechita, and other matters pertaining to shechita, that were explained, slaughters an animal in private, it is forbidden for that Jew and for others to eat from the animal that was slaughtered. This animal is close to being treated as a neveilah, due to the doubt involved (while there was no factor seen that would invalidate the slaughter, the chance of the shechita rendering the animal a neveilah is highly probable). When a person eats a kezayit (olive-sized portion) of this meat, he receives makkot mardut (a disciplinary lashing administered at the discretion of the local court for rebellious conduct). 
2. Even if such a person slaughtered in our presence four or five times, and the shechita he did in private seems to be kosher, it is forbidden to partake of it. Since he does not know the things that can cause the slaughter to become disqualified, it is possible he can cause the shechita to become disqualified erroneously. For example, he may delay, apply pressure to the animal's neck and slit it, slaughter with a blemished knife, or the like, accidentally. 
3. When a Jew knows the laws of shechita, he should not slaughter ab initio (le chatchila, as an initial and preferred option) until he slaughters in the presence of a wise man (hakham) many times until he is proficient and familiar. But if he slaughters in private, at the getgo, his shechita is kosher.  
4. One who knows the laws of shechita and slaughters in the presence of a hakham many times until he becomes familiar with shechita, he is called a mumcheh, an expert. Any expert may slaughter in private le chatchila (ab initio). Women and slaves who are knowledgable and expertly proficient in the laws of shechita may slaughter le chatchila. 