Penei Yehoshua on Shabbat
פני יהושע על שבת
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Penei_Yehoshua_on_Shabbat
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Penei Yehoshua on Shabbat



Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b






	What is Chanukah? The Rabbis taught… “the Greeks defiled all the oils in the Sanctuary,” and they found only one jar of pure oil, and a miracle occurred with it. (Author’s second edition note: This implies they could not use oil from outside the Sanctuary or make new oil. This was because all of Israel were ritually impure due to contact with the dead, as explicitly stated by the Beit Yosef.)
	At first glance, one might wonder why this miracle was necessary, since we hold that tumah hutrah b’tzibbur (ritual impurity is permitted in communal offerings). They could have used impure oil. While this works well according to the opinion that tumah d’chuya b’tzibbur (ritual impurity is only overridden but not entirely permitted), it is harder to understand according to the opinion that tumah hutrah b’tzibbur, as in that case, they wouldn’t even need to go to extra lengths to find pure oil, as stated in the Talmud in Yoma.
	Another question arises: if all the oil in the Sanctuary was defiled and only one jar was left, how did they have oil for the menachot (meal offerings) during those days? Based on this, it would seem to me to resolve one issue with another: certainly, for menachot, they could use impure oil, given that tumah hutrah b’tzibbur. However, regarding the oil for the menorah, it might not be appropriate to say tumah hutrah b’tzibbur, since lighting the menorah is not considered a service (avodah) of the altar. Moreover, it is also ruled that lighting the menorah is not considered avodah altogether and thus would be categorized as merely a preparation for a mitzvah (machshirei mitzvah), which does not override impurity.
	Yet, it is impossible to say this, as the Sifra in Parshat Emor explicitly derives that “to kindle a perpetual lamp” applies even on Shabbat and in a state of impurity. This is also ruled explicitly by Rambam, and the same conclusion is evident from the Talmud’s discussions, since if lighting did not override impurity, it would not override Shabbat either. Thus, it is clear that the menorah may be lit even in impurity.
	Accordingly, it must be said that for the menachot, no miracle was necessary, as they could easily find oil for them, since oil for menachot does not require being of the highest quality (k’tit), as derived explicitly from the verse, “crushed for lighting, not crushed for meal offerings.” Only for the menorah, where oil of the highest quality is required and would involve significant effort to procure, was a miracle needed.
	This brings us back to the original question: why was the miracle of the oil necessary, given that they could have used impure oil since tumah hutrah b’tzibbur?
	The answer is that the main purpose of the miracle was to demonstrate God’s love for Israel, as we find similar examples of miracles, such as when the Omer offering and the two loaves (shtei halechem) never became invalid. Since God performed a miracle for them in the primary matter of their redemption—that they were saved entirely from their enemies, who had decreed harsh persecutions upon Israel and commanded them to write on the horns of oxen that they had no share in the God of Israel—it was fitting that another miracle should occur with the menorah, as it serves as a testimony to Israel that the Divine Presence rests among them.
	This idea parallels the western lamp (ner ma’aravi), which served as evidence of the Divine Presence but sometimes extinguished after the death of Shimon HaTzaddik. Therefore, in those days, which were a time of Divine favor, this miracle was performed to show that Israel had returned to their original beloved status. This explanation seems correct to me.
