Abarbanel on I Kings
אברבנאל על מלכים א
merged
https://www.sefaria.org/Abarbanel_on_I_Kings
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-https://www.sefaria.org

Abarbanel on I Kings

Introduction

1. Said Isaac the son of Liadi, a prince and a great one in Israel, Don Judah Abarbanel, from the stock of Jesse the Beth-lehemi, from the seed of David the officer and commander of the nation, from the scattered and   divided nation, the exiles of Jerusalem who are in Spain.
2. Behold what chanced upon me in the course of writing the interpretation of the books (i.e. Joshua, Judges, Samuel and Kings) the opposite of the fate of Hiel of the House of Eli (Kings 1 17:34) who rebuilt Jericho’s foundations with his eldest and with his youngest, he hung the doors.  In the early days (which were better than these), I was silent about my guards in the Kingdom of Portugal, the land of my birth, addressed my mouth to G-d to interpret these four volumes for I had seen there the interpretations were sparse. The debts of the king and his officers wove a yoke upon my neck that I could not meet, until the hand of G-d meddled with me. The King of Portugal thought me his enemy for ?I was not violent? and he stood, planted at my right like an enemy to attack me without cause and to seize all I owned, enduring wealth and success and ??? but that I fled to the Kingdom of Castille like before the deadly sword. When I came there, I was like a strange in the land, a guest searching for a place to rest. I understood that G-d was telling me to complete my ???? and I interpreted the three first volumes, Joshua, for G-d had delivered me and saved me from the sword of Pharoah, and Judges for G-d judged on Earth to decide my cases, and fight my fights with a violent thief and Samuel, for from G-d I have been answered. 

4. The Comprehensive List of Kings
5. Shaul the son of Kish according to what I have explained in the book of Shumel from the years of his reign, he became king in 2864 years from the Creation of the World and the days of his kingship were 20 years. In his days, Pinchas was the High Priest and Shumel the Seer was the Prophet. 
6. David the son of Yishai in the year 2884 to the Creation of the World, and his reign was 40 years. In his days, Avitar was the High Priest and the prophets of his time were Shumel the Seer, Gad the 'Chozeh' and Natan the Prophet. 
7. Sholmo, his son, became king in the year 2924 to the Creation of the World and his reign was for 40 years, like his father. In his days, Tzdok was the High Priest and the prophets: Natan the Prophet, Achiyah the Shiloni, and Edo the 'Chozeh'. 
8. The Kings of Judah: 
9. Rechavam the son of Shlomo became king in the year 2964 to the Creation of the World and his reign was 17 years. In his days, Achimatz was the High Priest and the prophets were Shamayah the Prophet and Edo the Visionary. 
10. Aviyah, his son, reigned in the year 2981 from Creation, for three years. In his days Azariah was High Priest and Edo the Prophet. 
11. Asa, his son, reigned in the year 2984 to Creation for 41 years. In his days, Johoram was High Priest, Azariah the son of Oded and Chanani the Seer and Yehu the son of Chanani were the prophets.
12. Jehosaphat, his son reigned in the yar 3520 of Creation for 25 years. In his days, Jehochaz was High Priest and Ovadiah and Jechiziel the son of Zechairahu from the children of Asaf and Michahu the son of Yimla and Jehu the son of Channani were prophets.
13. Jehoram his son reigned in the year 3050 from Creation for 8 years. In his days Jehoyada was High Priest and Elijah the prophet. 
14. Achizahu his son reigned in the year 3058 from Creation and ruled in Jerusalem one year. In his days Jehoshua was High Priest and Elisha the Prophet.
15 Atalia the mother of Achizyahu seized the kingdom in the year 3950 of Creation and destroyed the royal descendants and reigned 6 years. In her days, Yehoyahu, her father-in-law, was the High Priest and Elisha the Problem. Her reign overlapped the reign of Yoash. 
16 Yoash the son of Achizahu, reigned in the year 3560 of Creation for 40 years. In his days, Yehoyahda. Afterwards ????? the high priest and Zechariah the son of Yehoyahda was High Priest and Prophet. 
17. Amatzia, his son, reigned in the years 3105 from Creation and ruled 29 years. In his days, Tzedikahu was high priest, Amutz the brother of Amazyahu , the father of Isaiah the Prophet.
18.  Uzziah his son, reigned in the year 3134 of Creation. He ruled 16 years and in his days, Joel was High Preist and Hosea, Amos, and Isaiah were prophets.



