Menachot
מנחות
merged
http://www.sefaria.org/Menachot
This file contains merged sections from the following text versions:
-Sefaria Community Translation
-http://www.sefaria.org



Menachot

Daf 1a



Daf 1b



Daf 2a



Daf 2b



Daf 3a



Daf 3b



Daf 4a



Daf 4b



Daf 5a



Daf 5b



Daf 6a



Daf 6b



Daf 7a



Daf 7b



Daf 8a



Daf 8b



Daf 9a



Daf 9b



Daf 10a



Daf 10b



Daf 11a



Daf 11b



Daf 12a



Daf 12b



Daf 13a



Daf 13b



Daf 14a



Daf 14b



Daf 15a



Daf 15b



Daf 16a



Daf 16b



Daf 17a



Daf 17b



Daf 18a



Daf 18b



Daf 19a



Daf 19b



Daf 20a



Daf 20b



Daf 21a



Daf 21b



Daf 22a



Daf 22b



Daf 23a



Daf 23b



Daf 24a



Daf 24b



Daf 25a



Daf 25b



Daf 26a



Daf 26b



Daf 27a



Daf 27b



Daf 28a



Daf 28b



Daf 29a



Daf 29b





Rabbi Yehudah said, "Rav said, 
"When Moshe ascended to the heavens, he found the Holy One, Blessed be He, sitting and attaching crowns to the letters. He said before Him,
"Master of the Universe! Who is staying your hand?"
He said to him,
"There is one man man who will exist after many generations, and Akiva the son of Yosef is his name, who will in the future expound on every crown and crown piles and piles of laws."
He said before Him,
"Master of the Universe! Show him to me."
He said to him, 
"Turn backwards."
He went and sat at the end of eight rows [of students in Rabbi Akiva's Beit Midrash], and he did not know what they were talking [about]. He got upset.
As soon as he got to one [other] thing, his students said to him,
"Our teacher, from where do you learn this?"
He said to them,
"It is a law [that was taught] to Moshe at Sinai."
He calmed down.
He returned and came before the Holy One, Blessed be He, and said before Him,
"Master of the Universe! You have a man like this, and You are giving the Torah through me?"
He said to Him, 
"Be silent. This is what I have decided."
He said before Him,
"Master of the Universe! You have shown me his Torah; show me his reward." He said to him,
"Turn backwards." He turned backwards, and saw that they were tearing his skin with iron combs. He said before Him,
"Master of the Universe! Such Torah, and such reward!"
He said to him,
"Be silent. This is what I have decided."

Daf 30a



Daf 30b



Daf 31a



Daf 31b



Daf 32a

And he makes a space above and a space below and he makes its passages open
I said to him
Rabbi, what is the reason?
He said to me,
Since they are not adjacent in the Torah.
And Rav Hananel said, Rav said,
The law is in accordance with Rabbi Shimon son of Elazar.  Is this not regarding the open ones?
No, regarding the space.
And how much space?
Rav Menashya son of Jacob said, and some say Rav Shmuel son of Jacob said,
Like the space of the clasp of scribes.
Abaye said to Rabbi Joseph
And do you not explain that when Rav said it it was regarding spacing?
But behold Rav holds by custom, and now the people are accustomed to closed
For Rabbah said, Rav Kahana said, Rav said,
If Elijah were to come and say, they perform halitsah with a shoe, they should listen to him.  [If he were to say] they should not perform halitsah with a sandal, they should not listen to him, for the nation already have the custom with a sandal.
And Rabbi Joseph said, Rabbi Kahane said, Rav said,
If Elijah were to come and say, they should not perform halitsah with a shoe, they listen to him.  [If he were to say] they should not perform halitsah with a sandal, they should not listen to him, for the nation already has the custom with a sandal.
What is the difference between them?
Whether a shoe is ab initio.
Rather, learn from it that it was regarding spacing.
Rav Nahman son of Isaac said,
It is a commandment to make them closed, and if he made them open he has done well.  What is open?  As Rabbi Shimon son of Elazar said, even open.
Let us say it helps [support this opinion]:
Similarly, a Torah scroll that has worn out, and phylacteries that have worn out, they should not make them into a mezuzah because one does not demote from a more sever holiness to a lighter one.
But if one could demote, one could make [phylacteries and Torah scrolls into mezuzahs]!  Why?
These are closed and these are open!
Perhaps to fill in.
But if one could demote, one could make [phylacteries and Torah scrolls into mezuzahs]?
But was it not taught in a Baraita:
It is a law to Moses from Sinai, phylacteries on kelaf and mezuzah on dukhsustos.
Kelaf on the side of the flesh; dukhsustos on the side of the hair.
That is the ideal way to do the mitzvah.
But was it not taught in a Baraita:
If he did otherwise, it is invalid!  [That is only] regarding phylacteries.  but was it not taught in a Baraita, if he did otherwise either regarding this or that, it is invalid!
Both are regarding phylacteries, and one is if he wrote on kelaf on the side of the hair, and one

Daf 32b



Daf 33a



Daf 33b



Daf 34a



Daf 34b



Daf 35a






And Rav Hananel said, Rav said
The underside of the phylacteries is a law to Moses from Sinai.
Abaye said
The rim of the phylacteries[through which the strap passes] is a law to Moses from Sinai.
And Abaye said
The shin of phylacteries is a law to Moses from Sinai, and the groove must reach to the place of the stitches...
Rav Dimi from Nehardea said





Rabbi Isaac said
Black straps are a law to Moses from Sinai.
This is contradicted by a Baraita:
Phylacteries should not be tied except with their own type [of material], whether green or black or white;
He should not make them red because of disgrace and another thing.
Rabbi Judah said
It happened with a student of Rabbi Akiva, that he would tie his phylacteries with strips of tekhelet, and he did not say anything to him.  Is it possible that that righteous one saw his student and did not object to him?
He said to him
Certainly
He did not see him, and if he saw him he would not have let him.
It happened with Hyracnus the son of Rabbi Eliezer son of Hyracnus that he would tie his phylacteries with strips of purple, and he did not say anything to him.  Is it possible that that righteous one saw his son and did not object to him?
They said to him
Certainly he did not see him, and if he saw him he would not have let him.
It is taught, however
Whether green or black or white!
It is not a contradiction
Here [refers to colors] on the inside, here on the outside.
If on the inside, what disgrace and another thing could there be?
Sometimes they turn around.
It was taught
Square phylacteries is a law to Moses from Sinai....

Daf 35b



Daf 36a



Daf 36b



Daf 37a



Daf 37b



Daf 38a



Daf 38b



Daf 39a



Daf 39b



Daf 40a



Daf 40b



Daf 41a



Daf 41b



Daf 42a



Daf 42b



Daf 43a



Daf 43b




































Rabbi Eliezer son of Yaacov says:  ..
Everyone who has tefillin on his head and tefillin on his arm and tsitsit on his clothes and a mezuzah at his door, it is all subject to a presumption that he will not sin, as it is said, 
“and the three-fold cord will not easily be broken” (Eccles. 4:12).  And it says, ...
“The angel of the LORD encampeth round about them that fear Him, and delivereth them” (Psalm 34:8).
It was taught in a baraita, Rabbi Meir used to say, ...
why is tekhelet singled out from all the colors?  ...
Because tekhelet is similar to the sea, and the sea is similar to the firmament, and the firmament is similar to the Throne of Glory, as it is said, ...
“and there was under His feet the like of a paved work of sapphire stone, and the like of the very heaven for clearness,” and it is written, 
"a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone.”


... 
It was taught in a Baraita: R. Meir said:
a person must make 100 blessings each day, as it is written...
(Deuteronomy 10:12) "And now Israel, what does the Lord your God ask of you..."

Daf 44a



Daf 44b



Daf 45a



Daf 45b



Daf 46a



Daf 46b



Daf 47a



Daf 47b



Daf 48a



Daf 48b



Daf 49a



Daf 49b



Daf 50a



Daf 50b



Daf 51a



Daf 51b



Daf 52a



Daf 52b



Daf 53a





(Leviticus 6:10) You shall not bake Chametz, only Matzah